SENSITIVAE CENSITAE A Description of the Genus Mimosa Linnaeus (Mimosaceae) in the New World RUPERT C. BARNEBY Contents Abstract 3 Introduction 3 Acknowledgments 5 Systematic Treatment 6 Taxonomy of the Genus, Past and Present 7 Morphological and some Biological Characters Bearing on Evolution and Classification of Mimosa .. 9 Evolutionary Sequences 17 Summary of Evolutionary Progressions in Mimosa 22 Etymology of Mimosa 23 Key to Sections of Genus Mimosa 24 Sectio A. MIMADENIA 25 Key to Series of sect. Mimadenia 26 Series i. Myriadeniae 27 Series ii. Glanduliferae 31 Series iii. Revolutae 56 Series iv. Nothacaciae 59 Sectio B. BATOCAULON 61 Keys to series of sect. Batocaulon 63 Series i. Distachyae 67 Series ii. Andinae 84 Series iii. Acanthocarpae 90 Series iv. Acantholobae 105 Series v. Boreales 110 Series vi. Leiocarpae 119 Series vii. Bimucronatae 160 Series viii. Leucaenoideae 174 Series ix. Rubicaules 176 Series x. Fagaracanthae 180 Series xi. Bahamenses 187 Series xii. Farinosae 190 Series xiii. Ephedroideae 194 Series xiv. Echinocaulae 195 Series xv. Paucifoliatae 197 Series xvi. Glandulosae 227 Series xvii. Stipellares 234 Series xviii. Auriculatae 254 Series xix. Caesalpiniifoliae 256 Series xx. Ceratoniae 258 Series xxi. Cordistipulae 265 Series xxii. Campicolae 280 Series xxiii. Filipedes 283 Series xxiv. Quadrivalves .
.
.
.
.
290 Series xxv. Plurijugae 303 Sectio C. CALOTHAMNOS 313 Sectio D. HABBASIA 347 Key to series of sect. Habbasia 349 Series i. Setosae 350 Series ii. Pachycarpae 366 Series iii. Habbasia 427 Series iv. Bipinnatae 446 Series v. Neptunioideae 473 Series vi. Rondonianae 480 Series vii. Rojasianae 481 Series viii. Pseudocymosae 485 Series ix. Piresianae 486 Sectio E. MIMOSA 490 Key to series of sect. Mimosa 491 Series i. Myriophyllae 492 Series ii. Mimosa 506 Key to subseries of ser. Mimosa 510 Subseries ii. 1.
Polycarpae 516 Subseries ii.2.
Pectinatae 522 Subseries ii.3.
Castae 524 Subseries ii.4.
Teledactylae 532 Subseries ii.5.
Mimosa 533 Subseries ii.6.
Pedunculosae 559 Subseries ii.7.
Lactifluae 571 Subseries ii.8.
Bolivianae 577 Subseries ii.9.
Dolentes 578 Subseries ii. 10.
Lundianae 591 Subseries ii. 11.
Trichocephalae 594 Subseries ii. 12.
Ramosissimae 597 Subseries ii. 13.
Serrae 603 Subseries ii. 14.
Sparsae 604 Subseries ii. 15.
Obstrigosae 612 Subseries ii. 16.
Pudicae 622 Subseries ii. 17.
Morongianae 644 Subseries ii. 18.
Bipennatulae 646 Subseries ii. 19.
Affines 649 Subseries ii.20.
Simplicissimae 652 Subseries ii.21.
Polycephalae 654 Subseries ii.22.
Dicerasteae 686 Subseries ii.23.
Discobolae 687 Subseries ii.24.
Hirsutae 690 Subseries ii.25.
Brevipedes 705 Subseries ii.26.
Thomistae 716 Subseries ii.27.
Pogocephalae 718 Subseries ii.28.
Microcarpae 728 Subseries ii.29.
Lanatae 737 Subseries ii.30.
Macrocalycinae 738 Subseries ii.31.
Reptantes 741 Subseries ii.32.
Ramentaceae 753 Subseries ii.33.
Axillares .. 754 Subseries ii.34.
Dryandroideae 758 Subseries ii.35.
Dutranae 760 Subseries ii.36.
Widgrenianae ; 761 Subseries ii.37.
Diffiisae 762 Series iii. Modestae 763 Appendix I. Nomina incertae sedis vel nuda Appendix II. Mimosae of Sesse & Mocino Selected Bibliography Numerical Register of Exsiccatae Index to Scientific Names (Prepared by James W. Grimes) 773 778 780 784 811 Abstract BARNEBY, R. C. (New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY 10458-5126, U.S.A.) SENSITIVAE CENSITAE: a description of the genus Mimosa Linnaeus (Mimosaceae) in the New World.
Mem. New York Bot. Gard. 65: 1-835, 1991.—In this survey of American Mimosa 479 species and 225 subspecies or varieties (a total of 704 taxa) are aligned in five major groups termed sections, these in turn divided into 78 serial or subserial divisions.
The primary emphasis is on species native to South America and West Indies, those of continental North America being treated in less exhaustive detail.
Significant departures from the classic taxonomy of the genus proposed by G. Bentham in 1875 are: recognition of an ostensibly primitive sect. Mimadenia, characterized by the presence of leaf-nectaries; the division of sect. Habbasia into two sections of equal rank; the reduction of genera Schrankia Willd. and Schranckiastrum Hassler to series within Mimosa sect. Batocaulon; and the reordering into subgroups of the very large and complex, haplostemonous sect. Mimosa.
These innovations are required to accommodate the numerous additions (±30% of the presently known total) that have been discovered in the past century, especially in Brazil south of Amazonia.
An introductory chapter provides a rationale for the proposed classification and a set of hypothetical evolutionary sequences on which it is based.
All taxa are keyed and described.
Sixty-seven distribution maps and 27 pages of line-drawings are provided.
Appendices dealing with doubtful names, a selected bibliography, a list of numbered exsiccatae studied, and an index to epithets follow the main text.
Key words: Mimosaceae, Mimosa, New World, systematics.
Introduction In the years 1964-1972 Howard S. Irwin, under the dual sponsorship of the New York Botanical Garden and Universidade de Brasilia, undertook extensive and detailed botanical surveys of parts of the Brazilian Planalto situated in the states of Mato Grosso, Goias, Distrito Federal, upland and western Bahia, and Minas Gerais.
The program was extended through 1975 under the direction of William R. Anderson and the field of exploration expanded to Mato Grosso do Sul. In the course of the whole survey Irwin obtained more than thirty-seven thousand and Anderson more than five thousand collections of flowering and cryptogamic plants, mostly in duplicates of five to ten.
Having revised a section of the genus Cassia for his doctoral dissertation, Irwin had developed a strong interest in the whole family Leguminosae, and consequently took special pains to accumulate a representative sample of the rich leguminous flora of the cerrado province, concentrating on tribe Cassiinae, tribe Phaseolae, and Mimosa, each of which has a center of diversification in this region.
Monographic revisions of Cassiinae (Irwin & Bameby, 1978, 1982) and of the genera Eriosema and Rhynchosia (Grear, 1970, 1978), based initially on these collections but taking into account all related taxa known from the Americas, have been published.
When work on Cassiinae had been completed and Dr. Irwin had left the Garden, an imposing stack of planaltine Mimosa (listed numerically in the Exsiccatae of this volume) remained unsorted and unidentified.
In 1981 I undertook the challenging task of naming this material, contemplating no more than working up and distributing it, describing the many novelties contained in it, and preparing a summary report of Mimosa of the Planalto.
This undertaking was hampered from the first by lack of antecedent literature.
The last comprehensive revision of New World Mimosa was that of Bentham in his global monograph of the Mimoseae (1875), supplemented by the descriptive account of the genus in Flora brasiliensis (1876).
After a century of neglect the proportion of Brazilian taxa for which no readymade name could be found approached thirty-three per cent of those represented in herbaria.
No truly satisfactory disposition of these could be made without comparative study of related species occurring in or endemic to neighboring territories, especially the floristically related campos of Paraguay, northeast Argentina, and extratropical eastern Brazil.
To be sure, the mimosa flora of Argentina and of the Brazilian state of Santa Catarina and the whole series Lepidotae (sect. Calothamnos of this account) had been carefully revised by Burkart (1948, 1964, 1979), but for the rest of South America, and for other sections of the genus, there was no modem evaluation beyond the scanty floristic literature and random distributional notes.
As my knowledge of South American Mimosa increased, I found it expedient to extend my study, first to Amazonia and northern South America, subsequently to all of North America and the West Indies, and finally, though only as a superficial survey, to the relatively insignificant paleotropic element of the genus.
At the time that I started to work on the planaltine members of the genus, Isely (1973) had already published a revision of the genus in southern United States, and Grether was well advanced in studies o^Mimosa of Mexico and Mesoamerica, fields covered by Britton and Rose (1928) in their controversial treatment of Mimosaceae for North American Flora.
Independent revisionary study of North American Mimosa, except the West Indies, was clearly superfluous; yet in order to acquire a sound grasp of the morphology and dispersal of the genus worldwide I have felt obliged to acquire a somewhat detailed knowledge of its North American representatives and a fair familiarity with those of continental Africa, Madagascar, and southern Asia.
It early became evident that a century of discovery had brought to light not only species of Mimosa but even classes of species undreamed of in Bentham's day, and had revealed deficiencies and ambiguities in his hierarchical classification of the genus.
To accommodate a mass of new information, the system required extension and modification.
It is around this perception that my revision of American Mimosa has taken form.
As implied in its title, this book is intended as a descriptive inventory or census of the species of Mimosa found in the New World.
It is designed to provide a means of identification, a record of geographical and ecological distribution, and to serve as a precursor for regional and state floras currently in preparation.
Conservationists will find in these pages a roUcall of rare and highly localized species actually or potentially endangered.
Where appropriate I have drawn attention to some of the unsolved taxonomic problems which can best be addressed by Latin American botanists living within easy access to the living plants.
No one can appreciate better than the author the deficiencies of the work.
The anatomy, the genetics, the breedingand pollination-systems and the chemical attributes oiMimosa are essentially unknown, and the palynology, reflected herein from the work of others, is still incomplete.
However, a guide to a large genus that brings into focus outstanding problems in its classification will surely be helpful to those whose taste or mission is to mine more intensively a smaller field.
The supraspecific taxonomy proposed herein is based squarely on that of Bentham (1875), which was doubtless the best that could have been devised at the time and will surely survive indefinitely as the fundamental text.
Modifications introduced herein accommodate new discoveries and reflect a shift of emphasis on the significance of particular taxonomic characters.
In the sections immediately following the generic description I have first enumerated systematically the gross morphological characters that either have been found useful or that have potential use for taxonomic purposes; and secondly have considered each of them in terms of polarity.
The probable evolutionary sequences that are predicated form the scaffolding of the system.
A difference will be noted in detail of coverage between the wholly or partly South American and West Indian mimosas and those found exclusively in continental North America.
The latter are in course of revision by Rosaura Grether, who is preparing accounts of the genus for the state of Oaxaca and for the projected flora of Mesoamerica, and in a recent paper has already disposed of much of the cluttered synonymy inherited from Britton and Rose.
The picture of Mimosa in the Americas would be sadly incomplete if Mexico were excluded, but in view of Grether's work in preparation, a less detailed account in this place must suffice.
Similar considerations might apply to Mimosa of Paraguay, currently under study in Buenos Aires by Renee Fortunato, who is writing up the genus for Flora del Paraguay; but the mimosa flora of Paraguay and that of southeastern and extratropical Brazil are so intimately related and continuous that they can profitably be treated only as a unit.
My aspiration to describe in this place and in equivalent depth the mimosas of the Old World has been frustrated by a lack of material.
I have examined specimens and dissected flowers of about three fourths of the supposed species, and have formed an opinion of their phylogenetic relationship to the American stock, but I have developed no clear notion of specific boundaries, especially between the species of Madagascar, which are in urgent need of study in the field.
Acknowledgments As already mentioned, the collections of Mimosa assembled in Brazil south of Amazonia by H. S. Irwin, W. R. Anderson and colleagues formed the nucleus ofthe study material on which this revision is based and, furthermore, furnished the occasion of the revision itself.
Substantial and invaluable supplements from this same region were received as gifts or in exchange from Dr. G. Hatschbach of Curitiba, from Dr. G. Eiten, Prof. E. Heringer and Dr. J. S. Kirkbride of Brasilia, and from the late Guido Pabst of Herbarium Bradeanum in Rio de Janeiro, while Dr. R. Harley and Mr. G. Lewis of Kew have shared their extensive and critical collection of Mimosa from the state of Bahia.
The general herbarium at NY, where specialization in neotropical Leguminosae, initiated by N. L. Britton, has never flagged, provided the principal body of morphological data for description of extra-Brazilian Mimosa, but other important sources of information in the United States have been the herbaria of Field Museum at Chicago (F), the Harvard University Herbaria at Cambridge (A, GH), the Missouri Botanical Garden at Saint Louis (MO), and the Smithsonian Institution at Washington (US).
I acknowledge with gratitude permission to work in and borrow freely from all of these, and from the great European herbaria at Bmssels (BR), Copenhagen (C), Edinburgh (E), Geneva (G), Hamburg (HBG), London (BM), Paris (P, with the guiding hand of Alicia Lourteig), Stockholm (S) and Vienna (W).
Of paramount importance, not least because it houses the personal herbarium of George Bentham together with classical collections that contributed to the Revision of Mimoseae in 1875, is the incomparable collection at Kew, where I have had the privilege of working at intervals over the years.
Here Dr. R. Polhill and Mr. G. Lewis were paragons of generous assistance.
Specimens in smaller but significant numbers have been received from correspondents almost throughout Latin America; though all cannot be mentioned individually, none are forgotten, and the names of most appear in the appended list of Exsiccatae.
I owe thanks of a special kind to Renee Fortunato of Buenos Aires and Rosaura Grether-Gonzalez of Mexico City, expert aficionadas of Mimosa of southern South America and tropical North America respectively, who have shared with me ideas on nomenclature, classification and dispersal of the genus and have participated in joint publication of new taxa.
At The New York Botanical Garden I have enjoyed the loyal support of the scientific staff" under the direction of Drs.
Iain Prance and Patricia Holmgren, and in the library the gracious and selffess help of Lothian Lynas and Jane Brennan.
Stephen CrisafuUi most capably and cheerfully handled and kept record of the traffic of incoming and outgoing specimens.
Arnold Tiehm organized and recorded the distribution of duplicates from the Irwin-Anderson collections, which are now widely dispersed in major herbaria of the world.
Rachel Prance entered most of the Exsiccatae into a computer memory, using a program designed for the purpose by Dr. Noel Holmgren.
The illustrations, which speak for themselves, are the work of an exceptional botanical artist, Bobbi Angeli.
The manuscript was read by James Grimes, who provided a valuable commentary and suggestions for improvement of substance and language.
The scrupulous editorship of William Buck will be apparent even to a casual reader.
My work on Mimosa has been made possible by support from the National Science Foundation.
In 1974, on a field-trip to the Brazilian Planalto led by William Anderson and Gert Hatschbach, under the aspices of the Foundation, I first experienced the magical environment of cerrado and campo rupestre vegetation, in which Mimosa has developed some of its most surprising and complex forms.
The herbarium work and travel leading to this summary census of the genus in the New World was entirely supported by NSF Grant BSR 82-03352 to The New York Botanical Garden.
Abbreviations Used in Species Descriptions fl(s)—flower(s) fld—flowered jug.—jugate If-leaf If-formula—leaf-formula lf-stk(s)-leaf-stalk(s) lft(s)-leaflet(s) Ivd—leaved lvs—leaves stk(s)—stalk(s) Systematic Treatment MIMOSA LINNAEUS Mimosa Linnaeus, Sp. pi. 516.
1753 & Gen. pi. ed. 5, 233.
1754; emend.
Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 358.
1841, in Bentham & Hooker, Gen. pi. 1(2): 593.
1865; Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 388.
1875. —Sp. lectotypica (Britton & Wilson, Sci. Surv.
Porto Rico & Virgin Is. 5(3): 357.
1924, confirmed by Britton & Killip, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 35: 149.
1936, and by Farr & al., Index nom. generic.
2: 1097.
1979): M. sensitiva Linnaeus.—An alternative lectogeneritypus, M. pudica Linnaeus, proposed by Hitchcock & Green, Proposals Brit. bot. 162.
1929, is rejected as posterior.
Essential characters.
Stamens as many or twice as many as corolla-lobes, the filaments either free, or basally adherent to corolla to form a shallow stemonozone, or shortly monadelphous, the anther-connective in dorsal view round or broadly ovate, girdled or almost so by the sacs, lacking a terminal gland; fruit a planocompressed or turgid pod, with continuous replum (margo) corresponding with the sutures, the valves at maturity either continuous and therefore separating from replum, either along both sides or primarily from apex downward, in one piece, or (more frequently) articulate into free-falling 1-seeded articles, then termed a craspedium; seed-testa bearing on each face a ± hippocrepiform pleurogram (linea fissuralis); endosperm present.
Description.
Trees, shrubs, vines, subshrubs (a few acaulescent), herbs (erect or humifuse), a few of the latter monocarpic; stems either a) unarmed, or b) armed at or below each node, either on infrastipular or infrapetiolar ribs, with few, commonly 1-3, either straight, recurved, or rarely antrorse aculei, or c) serially armed on several or all ribs of each intemode with files of recurved (cat's-claw) aculei, these sometimes extending to the If-axes, and sometimes d) in addition or alternatively, hispid with stiff setaculei intermediate in form and stiffness between setae and aculei.
Indumentum composed in various measure and in random combination of: a) minute incurved puberulence, b) short plain hairs, c) short clavate or granular, commonly orange or livid, non-secretory trichomes, d) filiform set(ul)ae, e) tapering or flagelliform setae broadest or bulbously dilated at base, these sometimes laterally attached and seemingly calcarate, f) setae (especially cilia of lfts) produced backward into the epidermis, g) scabrous or arborescently plumose setae becoming, by shortening of the primary axis, stelliform, h) gland-tipped (secretory) set(ul)ae, or i) in sect. Mimadenia only, sessile or stalked, peltate or squamiform trichomes; exceptionally the whole plant glabrous or the indumentum rudimentary, the plain setae when present variably oriented.
Stipules setiform, lanceolate, ligulate, or dilated, then many-nerved extemally or the nervation immersed, the blades commonly persistent, sometimes becoming dry and fragile.
Lvs (except of Af. unipinnata) bipinnate, the primary and secondary axes normally pulvinate (the primary pulvinus rarely suppressed), the lfts sessile, the first pair of each pinna commonly diflferentiated into paraphyllidia (stipels of Bentham), the pairs of pinnae and the lfts folded forward at night and often abruptly so by day following shock or touch and the petiole simultaneously refracted (but in some spp. all inert); If-stk sulcate ventrally, the sulcus often bridged between pinna-pairs and not rarely charged with an ascending spicule (also formerly called a stipel), in sect. Mimadenia alone the Ifstk with one or more cupular or mounded (flaskshaped) secretory nectaries; If-formula highly diverse, the pinnae and the lfts one to many pairs, the number and size commonly reciprocally adjusted; venation of lfts basically palmate from pulvinule, the primary nerves sometimes immersed, sometimes elaborately branched and distally anastomosing, a pallid or callous marginal nerve developed in some species-groups.
Inflorescence composed of spikes (racemes) or capitula, these solitary or fasciculate either in the axil of contemporary lvs or gathered into terminal, simple pseudoracemes or branched panicles, in some xeromorphic spp. fasciculate on hemispherical brachyblasts along annotinous branches, in a few acaulescent subshrubs the peduncles radical scapiform; bracts either shorter than or enclosing the fl-buds, the capitulum shortly before anthesis termed in the first case moriform (resembling a Morus syncarp), in the latter conelike, the bracts either deciduous or persistent; bracteoles 0; fls either sessile or (less often) shortly pedicellate, 3-5(-6)-merous, either all haplostemonous, or all diplostemonous and then either all hermaphrodite or some lower ones of a unit of inflorescence (rarely all) functionally staminate with rudimentary gynoecium or exclusively staminate, in few spp. of sect. Mimosa the upper fls haplostemonous hermaphrodite and some lower ones staminate diplostemonous; calyx campanulate, or reduced to a shallow saucer, or even obsolete, the orifice either truncate, or denticulate, or lobed, the lobes in some paleaceous and cleft to variable depth, when deeply cleft becoming pappiform; corolla-lobes united into a tube commonly as long as or longer than, exceptionally shorter than, the free blades, these either plane or cymbiform, 1-several-nerved; filaments pink-purple, pink fading whitish, white, or (sect. Calothamnos) ochroleucous to bright sulfur-yellow, ordinarily 2-several times as long as corolla; pollen grains united into simple, double, or triple tetrads.
Fruit as described above, either sessile or stipitate, the valves often coUiculate or bullate over each seed, the cavity either continuous or commonly closed between successive seeds, sometimes by a hyaline partition, the replum and valves either separately or together glabrous to puberulent, setose, glandularsetose or aculeate (the indumentum independent of that of stems or foliage); seed-funicle elongate filiform; seeds either transverse to the vertical axis of pod, or obliquely basipetal, or vertically basipetal, mostly compressed-ovoid and uniseriate but sometimes deformed or disoriented by crowding; germination epigeal.
Spp. ± 480 of which 461 are native to the New World, most numerous and diverse within the tropics at low and middle elevations, a few extending n. into temperate centr. United States and s. into temperate Argentina, few native American but widely naturalized or casually weedy in the paleotropics (one or two, M. peUita, M. pudica, perhaps naturally circumtropical but also opportunistically weedy), few native in tropical Africa and s. Asia, about a dozen endemic to Madagascar; ranging in habitat from macrothermic equatorial forest to lowland savanna and campo habitats, tropical and subtropical thornforest and scmb woodland, tropical-montane brush-woodland, temperate grassland, and desert, readily adapting in growth-form to these environments; chief foci of speciation in a) Brazil s. of Amazonia and adj. Paraguay, Argentina, and Uruguay, and b) in centr. and s. Mexico, minor ones in Cuba-Hispaniola, the Orinoco basin, and Madagascar.
TAXONOMY OF THE GENUS, PAST AND PRESENT The Linnaean genus Mimosa, of which the name and part of the content were derived from Toumefort and antecedent sources, included elements oftoday's Inga, Calliandra, Entada, Acacia, Intsia, Pithecellobium (s. lat.) and Leucaena and was nearly coextensive with the modem family Mimosaceae so far as that was known to Linnaeus in 1753.
A first attempt at generic analysis of the mimosoid Leguminosae was made in 1806 by Willdenow, who restricted Mimosa to species in which octandrous flowers give rise to lomentiform fruits; it thus included among true Mimosae the genus Entada and, by mistake, Albizia pistaciifoUa.
In 1810 Poiret perpetuated and extended the concept of Linnaeus in a strange form, listing all known Mimoseae under the French title of "Acacie' but translated into the botanical genus Mimosa.
Poiret's legacy is the use in Europe of the vernacular terms mimosa, or French mimose, for cultivated species of Acacia, and in North America ior Albizia julibrissin.
A critical classification of Mimosaceae was first explored by Bentham in 1841 and perfected by him in 1875.
Everything written on the family prior to 1841, except for the considerable contribution of DeCandolle (1825), is for the modem systematist of only historical or antiquarian interest.
Bentham's magisterial world revision of tribe Mimoseae published in 1875 is and is likely 8 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 ever to remain the point ofdeparture for students of the family.
In his notes on Mimoseae of 1841 Bentham placed the genus Mimosa in a tribe Eumimoseae characterized by free or almost free petals valvate in praefloration coincident with isomerous stamens, and in a subtribe Gymnantherae more narrowly defined by glandless anthers.
In this context Mimosa, together with its satellite Schrankia, found a place between Desmanthus and Leucaena.
In the 1875 monograph the Gymnantherae became a tribe Eumimoseae, modified only so as to bring Neptunia, despite its usually gland-tipped anthers, close to the obviously related Desmanthus.
While Schrankia was here maintained in generic rank it was evaluated (Bentham, 1875: 349) as "forming more appropriately an American section of Mimosa than an independent genus."
Subsequent developments, involving new genera, new species, and much data concerning the old, have been reviewed at length by Lewis and Elias (1981), who have proposed a materially modified classification for the (sub)family.
In this classification only one tribe of Mimosaceae with valvate perianth and isomerous stamens is recognized, but this is divided into twelve informally named clusters of genera, of which only the so-called Piptadenia-group is of immediate concern.
The definition of the group is broadly drawn so as to admit much but not all of Bentham's tribes Piptadenieae and Adenanthereae in addition to Eumimoseae, while contriving to exclude Leucaena, Desmanthus, and Neptunia.
This comprehensive definition of the Piptadenia group, while difl&cult to reject on grounds oflogic, is conceptually unsatisfactory; it has the merit, however, of emphasizing a closer relationship between Mimosa and Piptadenia (sens, lat.) than Bentham's classification would suggest.
This relationship will be considered in greater detail below.
Botanists occupied with suprageneric classification of Mimosaceae in general and in particular with generic classification of Piptadenia and its close kindred and segregates are far from consensus.
By contrast, Bentham's generic definition of Mimosa has found nearly universal acceptance.
Discovery of new species has added to the array of individually striking features that must be incorporated into a complete description of the genus, but its limits have been challenged seriously only by Britton and Rose (1928) in North American Flora, where a novel division of the genus, or rather of the North American representatives of the genus, was attempted.
The segregate genera Neomimosa Britton & Rose, Lomoplis Rafinesque sensu Britton & Rose and Mimosopsis Britton & Rose were each based on a species of Mimosa in which the pod-valves fail to break up at maturity into one-seeded articles; Pteromimosa Britton and Acanthopteron Britton each on a species in which the replum, of the craspedium in the first case and of the valvate fruit in the second, develops during maturation an exaggerated crest of fused setae; and Haitimimosa Britton on the peculiar M. extranea, in which most leaves are reduced to a phyllode but the fruit remains a conventional mimosa-craspedium.
In his earliest paper on Mimosa Bentham (1841) proposed for the species with continuous pod-valves, at the time few in number, a sect. Ameria; but later, finding that this feature occurs randomly in mutually distant branches of the genus, he was obliged to abandon it.
The winglike crest of Pteromimosa and Acanthopteron is merely an exaggeration of the row of aculei or setaculei borne along the midrib of the replum in otherwise similar and sympatric diplostemonous mimosae.
Mimosa extranea is intimately linked, by way of incipiently phyllodial M. leonardii, to sympatric Fagaracanthae of Hispaniola.
An even-handed projection of Britton's generic criteria to South American Mimosa would entail, at the very least, segregation of ser. Myriophyllae from sect. Mimosa, of M. (Somniantes) brachycarpa and the whole ser. Pachycarpae from sect. Habbasia, and the more or less phyllodial M. phyllodinea and M. equisetum from ser. Batocaulon.
Nor would the homogeneity of the residue be greatly enhanced.
The artificiality of the Brittonian method has long been apparent, and the segregate genera proposed in North American Flora have been largely ignored.
In the present revision Bentham's generic definition of Mimosa is maintained with only one minor departure, the inclusion of Schrankia Wifldenow as sect. Batocaulon ser. Quadrivalves, and with one reservation involving the affinity of the newly proposed sect. Mimadenia, more fully discussed below.
My intrageneric classification differs from that of Bentham principally in these points: haplostemony in sers.
Myriadeniae and Plurijugae is thought to be derived independently from diplostemonous ancestry and in neither series shows any direct affinity to setose, haplostemonous sect. Mimosa; hypothetical reasons support the notion that the peculiar haplostemonous ser. Lepidotae of sect. Mimosa is also independently derived, probably from sect. Batocaulon ser. Leiocarpae or an immediate common ancestor, and is better transferred to an autonomous sect. Calothamnos.
Fiuther, the great number and variety of species discovered since 1875, which have swelled the genus by about two-fifths in the century, call for rather extensive reorganization of the infrasectional classification, by establishment of new categories and reordering of old.
As new insights are gained into the evolutionary processes to which Mimosa has been and continues to be subjected, this process of refinement is sure to continue.
It is my hope that this revision, by displaying in orderly fashion the wealth and variety of the genus and by emphasis on taxonomic problems insoluble by means of alpha-taxonomy, will stimulate inquiry and promote taxonomic progress.
It is axiomatic that any enduring quality of truth in taxonomic opinion is proportionate to the latter's compatibility with the facts of evolutionary history.
It is possible, of course, to construct a classification that is at once useful and arbitrary; but a classification that is useful and incorporates a realistic summation of evolutionary pathways is bound to be superior, because truer to nature, and more likely to provide a framework into which new facts can be fitted without strain.
The principles that have taken shape in my mind during my study of Mimosa and that constitute the logic ofthe taxonomy here proposed are best demonstrated by a summary description of each morphological character thought to yield useful information and, in turn, discussion of its possible or probable contribution to a general system.
Following this analytic method I propose to synthesize the principles that underlie the proposed taxonomy.
MORPHOLOGICAL AND SOME BIOLOGICAL CHARACTERS BEARING ON EVOLUTION AND CLASSIFICATION OF MIMOSA 1.
Growth-form and habitat.
Growth-form in Mimosa stands in delicate balance with habitat (and ultimately with dispersal), so the two can profitably be discussed under one heading.
The range of growth-forms runs from tree with single trunk through tree or treelet of bushy form to shrub, subshrub and herb, either perennial or, less often, monocarpic.
The true tree form, relatively infrequent in the genus, occurs both in macrothermic tropical forest (e.g., M. schomburgkii) and in cool extratropical woodland (e.g., M. scabrella).
Bush-trees, less than three meters in height and with several trunks arising from near ground-level, occur commonly in xeromorphic brush-woodlands; as a class they are feebly distinguished from true trees by branching pattern and shorter stature.
They prevail in open plant associations where competition for water is high but is low for light.
Many shrubby mimosas, perhaps the majority, are opportunistic, however, in the sense that when crowded they have the ability to produce sarmentose or leaning branches that may interpenetrate or clamber over their neighbors, even though they are potentially free-standing.
No sharp line can be drawn between such semiscandent shrubs and the true vines which, often armed with serial cat's-claw prickles, are obligate climbers that, when deprived of support, fall into diffuse tangles in forest gaps.
Vinelike mimosas are commonest in forest-savanna or gallery-savanna ecotones, or as festoons pendulous from riparian woodland.
Following a pattern widespread in Leguminosae of many complexions.
Mimosa has differentiated profusely in tropical and warmtemperate savanna habitats, where the species assume a variety of suffruticose forms.
Notable among these are simple wands that overtop the taller savanna grasses and are repeatedly firepruned (e.g., members of ser. Mimosa subser. Polycephalaeand Brevipedes), prevalent in cerrado and campo sujo of the Brazilian Planalto.
While these are functionally herbaceous, they develop either a woody caudex near ground-level or subterranean storage organs in the form of a xylopodium or tuberously thickened roots.
In campo rupestre at and above 900 m on the Brazilian Planalto some notably specialized forms have evolved on barren arenitic sands associated with sandstone outcrops or escarpments: scapose or subscapose subshrubs with few large and elaborately divided subradical leaves subtending a virgate efoliate pseudoraceme; acaulescent subshrubs with leaves and scapiform peduncles all rising directly from a xylopodium; and pachycaul rosette-trees with naked trunk (some with decid- 10 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 uous cortex and cinnamon-colored underbark) and ample leaves crowded toward the branchtips.
In high deserts of the Mexican Plateau the prevalent life-form is that of a stiffly branched microphyllous and usually drought-deciduous shrublet, often strongly armed and sometimes flowering from brachyblasts before appearance of the new season's leaves.
Many mimosae are adapted to or appear to require wet or temporarily waterlogged soils.
Such are the shmbby riparian M. pellita and its close relatives in ser. Habbasia, some of which become scandent if crowded, and denizens of wet campo or moist campo thickets which vary from erect bushes to humifuse subshrubs or trailing herbs adventitiously rooting from the nodes.
Monocarpic mimosas are few and occur mostly in unstable habitats, often as anthropochorous weeds.
In tropical lowlands their life-span is determined less by changes in the season than by available rootmoisture and ultimately by senescence.
Aged individual plants of monocarpic species may become woody in age.
As a general rule the mimosa species has a characteristic growth form in harmony with its preferred habitat.
The habit is, however, seldom evident from herbarium specimens unless the plant is small enough to be collectable in its entirety.
2.
Armament and indumentum.
The prickles (straight or curved), the plain (unbranched) setae, the gland-tipped setular trichomes, the eglandular setae arising from a sclerenchymatous foot recessed or seemingly retrodecurrent into the leaflet-margin that are characteristic of sect. Mimosa, the arborescently and stellately branched setae that are a constant feature of sect. Calothamnos but occur in occasional species of sects.
Habbasia and Mimosa also, and the small uniseriate hairs that are almost universal in Mimoseae, are all cuticular outgrowths and comprise an essentially continuous series of modifications: i) Prickles or aculei.—These are conveniently classified into two categories: a) straight or moderately curved, lignified structures of more or less definite number arising at each stem-node or on each intemode from the rib leading to the petiole and from the two ribs leading to the stipules; and b) recurved "cat's-claw" prickles of less lignified consistency scattered along all principal ribs of the stem and often also along the dorsal and lateral ribs of the leaf-stalk.
Prickles of the first type appear primarily defensive in function and are most frequent in trees or free-standing shrubs with woody trunks and branches; those of the second type, although effectively deterrent to grazing herbivores, function primarily as grapples, enabling the plant to climb and cling.
Aculei of these two types, not always decisively different from one another, are herein contrasted (as armament) with the indumentum that consists of hairs (pili) and bristles (setae).
All aculei tend to be basally dilated perpendicularly to the stemaxis and more or less laterally compressed.
Strong and stiff setae may sometimes be similarly dilated proximally and laterally compressed, and these differ from cat's-claw aculei only in being straighter and not or scarcely vulnerant.
For this intermediate type I have used the self-explanatory term setaculeus.
Because aculei of the first type may be reduplicated on each cauline internode and become indefinite in number, and moreover may be either forwardly or backwardly curved, no exact boundary can be drawn between them and prickles of the second type, although in a given species or group of species one or the other is ordinarily characteristic. ii) Setae. —In their simplest form these are differentiated from the weak incurved hairs (puberulence) nearly universal in mimosoid Leguminosae only by greater length, more strongly sclerified foot, and often tapering apex, have assumed several forms in the genus Mimosa.
At their simplest they consist of a single series of superimposed cells.
A more complex seta consists of perpendicularly elongate cells arranged in superimposed fascicles, each with a distally emergent tip.
Such setae appear scabrous under magnification of 10-50 diameters.
A further elaboration is the deployment from the central multicellular axis of horizontally spreading uniceUular branchlets.
When these are relatively few and stout the seta appears arborescently branched, and when they are more numerous and of more slender caliber the seta becomes plumose.
A variation on this theme involves abbreviation of the seta's primary axis and consequent approximation of the divergent branch-cells.
When carried to the extreme the seta becomes stellate.
These complex setae are most elaborately diversified in sect. Calothamnos, but are not confined to that group, occurring randomly in members of sect. Batocaulon ser. Leiocarpae, sect. Habbasia ser. Bipinnatae, and sect. Mimosa subser. Polycephalae, where presumably they are independently derived.
A modification ofthe seta observed only in sect. Habbasia is an asymmetrical basal thickening which when accentuated becomes a basipetal spur.
Viewed in profile such setae appear laterally attached above the base.
Very rarely the primary shaft of the seta becomes grossly thickened and wartlike and is beset with many unicellular branchlets, in consequence resembling (as in M. verrucosa) a diminutive sea-urchin.
A highly modified multicellular seta encountered only in ser. Myriadenae and Glanduliferae of sect. Mimadenia consists of a stalk of few small cells that branches apically into a whorl of severalcelled linear arms or more commonly of cuneately dilated segments, usually of a reddish or golden-orange color.
In some species of ser. Glanduliferae the secondary branches of the seta are fused into a pileiform head or assume the appearance of a minutely stalked peltate scale.
In some groups of sect. Habbasia, notably ser. Pachycarpae, the setae are drawn out into a whiplash tip and are then described as flagelliform.. Forming a distinct class of setae are those consisting of an erect uniseriate stalk and a compound excretory head; within this class several variations may be noted.
Most frequent is a stalk twice to many times longer than the head's diameter.
Especially frequent in sect. Batocaulon ser. Leiocarpae are glandular setae of which the very short stalk is sunk into a little pit on the hypophyllum of the leaflets so that the head, often of a translucent golden color, stands level with or projects only in the form of a lens from the epidermis.
In some species of sect. Batocaulon ser. Stipellares the stalk is eliminated and the head immersed in the epidermis, appearing extemally as a resinous spot.
In addition to the trichomes already described, many Mimosae bear, on stems and leaf-axes especially, extremely small thickened trichomes colored in shades of yellow, orange, or reddish-purple.
These non-secretory outgrowths, often mixed in among and sometimes concealed by longer trichomes, have the appearance of colored granules and are so termed in the descriptive text.
Armature and indumentum are in some taxa highly specific, in others variable and labile, so that no fixed taxonomic value can be attributed to either.
For example flowering branchlets of a tree invariably armed on older sterile branches may show no prickles whatever.
When the indumentum consists of a mixture of trichomes of different types, the relative proportions of these can vary enormously between individuals or between populations.
Despite this inherent intraspecific ambivalence the pubescence-type prevalent at the serial and sectional levels generally displays a broadly consistent character which carries strong systematic overtones.
Thus sect. Batocaulon, which may be armed or not, and glandular or not, is almost never setose and is completely free of the retrodecurrent setae of sect. Mimosa.
The sect. Habbasia, on the other hand, is almost universally setose as well as puberulent, or glandular-setose, or both.
The combination of arborescent or stellate setae with haplostemony almost, though not quite, defines sect. Calothamnos.
The section Mimosa is almost uniformly setose but only very exceptionally (in few Dolentes and Brevipedes) glandular or resinous.
3.
Stipules.
The stipules of most Mimosae are simple, narrowly lanceolate or subulate, oneor few-nerved, and often deciduous with age.
Occasionally they become stiff and dry when old, but they are never modified into spines.
In many species of sect. Habbasia and some of sect. Mimosa they are dilated, many-nerved, and vary in texture from submembranous with prominent striate venation to leathery with immersed venation visible, if at all, only on the adaxial face.
Most often they are small and lack individuality or, indeed, any apparent function.
Dilated stipules are very commonly associated with comparably dilated floral bracts, which in Leguminosae often appear to be genetically yoked.
Within the species stipules vary little; consequently when distinctively modified they are useful taxonomic markers.
4.
Petiolar nectaries and spicules.
Petiolar nectaries resembling in form those encountered in many Mimosaceae of tribes Ingeae and Acacieae and uniformly present in Piptadenia and Adenopodia of tribe Mimoseae are rare 12 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 and exceptional in Mimosa itself.
In this genus the nectary may be either cupular, with an orifice as broad as or broader than its pediment, or mounted, with grossly swollen or verruciform pediment and small orifice.
Both sorts excrete nectar, and are presumed to attract ants in exchange for the protection that these may afford.
The nectaries of Mimosa arise in conventional manner from the ventral face of the leaf-stalk, usually at a point below the insertion of the first pair of pinnae, but in two species of ser. Glanduliferae and in the single Andean species M. revoluta from between them, and in the last-mentioned also between successive pairs.
The infrapinnal nectary characteristic of ser. Myriadeniae, Glanduliferae (with two exceptions) and Nothacaciae appears homologous with that of the genera Piptadenia and Adenopodia, and these three series collectively appear intermediate between the bulk of derived and specialized Mimosae and the relatively primitive assemblage ofgenera that includes Entada and several modem segregates from Piptadenia sensu Bentham.
It is notable that the anthers of these nectariferous Mimosae, although they lack the terminal glandular appendage of Entada or Piptadenia, are somewhat intermediate in the form of their connective, a point mentioned further below in description of the androecium.
Interpinnal nectaries of M. revoluta arise in the same manner and in the same position as the spicules widespread among non-nectariferous sections of Mimosa.
The spicule is most often a tapering appendage and in many species small and easily overlooked, but in others somewhat dilated and subfoliaceous, and in some species of ser. Habbasia greatly exaggerated in length and spinescent.
Bentham referred to the spicule as a stipel, but used the same term for the paraphyllidia of this work, which are the degenerate leaflets situated at the base of a pinna-rachis immediately contiguous to its pulvinus.
In Leguminosae tme stipels arise, in symmetrical or asymmetrical pairs, not between pairs of pinnae or distal to the pulvini of leaflets, but subtend a leaflet in the manner that a stipule subtends a leaf.
True stipels are, however, unknown in the genus Mimosa.
In the anomalous M. rondoniana stmctures resembling stipels subtend the pinnae, but not the individual leaflets, of the bipinnate leaf.
The petiolar nectary in Mimosa is here thought to be an archaic feature derived from primitive diplostemonous stock of the tribe Mimoseae; and the spicule, in respect to its point of origin, as a rudimentary nectary of which the stalk persists although the excretory head and the function have been lost.
While the nectary is stabilized within the species, occurring in all leaves if in any, the spicule is more labile, uniformly present in all leaves of some species but in others present or not, or found only in random leaves, and in many species and species groups uniformly lacking.
A nectary here defines the section Mimadenia.
Presence or absence of spicules is useful in some cases as a discriminatory or confirmatory feature of a particular series or lower taxon but manifestly not so in others.
5.
Leaves.
The basic leaf-pattern of Mimosa is not different from that general in Mimosaceae: a bipinnate blade consisting of one to about forty pairs of pinnae, each of which bears one to more than one hundred pairs of leaflets.
Number and size of leaflets are as a rule reciprocally adjusted, so that within a given species or species-group the whole leaf, whether much or little divided, presents approximately the same extent of photosynthetic blade.
Pinnae and leaflets alike are inserted in opposite pairs, except in some species of sect. Batocaulon ser. Stipellares, where they alternate along the leaf-axes.
Number of pinnae per leaf and of leaflets per pinna often vary according to position on the plant or position on the leaf, as the case may be.
Primary leaves produced on vigorous young branchlets, leaves of stump-sprouts, and shade-leaves of barren branches are often more ample and more elaborately divided than those associated with flowers or fasciculate on lateral brachyblasts.
Pinnae tend to increase in length upward along the leafstalk and bear progressively more numerous leaflets.
The higher the average number of parts, the greater the range between high and low extremes.
The relatively simple leaf of subser. Mimosa, stabilized at exactly one pair of pinnae and two (or by loss of the anterior member of the proximal pair at one and a half) pairs of leaflets per pinna, varies in size but not in degree of division; whereas the multifoliolate leaves of most members of sect. Habbasia ser. Pachycarpae axe highly variable in both.
In any individual or any species the range of variation in highest number and greatest dimension of leaf-parts are, however, much narrower than the whole range, and focus on these maxima provides much sharper contrasts between taxa than comparison of total variation.
In this as in antecedent papers I have recorded for each taxon a leaf formula calculated exclusively from the upper limits, and not the full range, of numbers observed.
Thus a leafformula expressed as iii-vii/9-16 indicates that in the material studied the largest leaf of all specimens consisted of three to seven pairs of pinnae and the longest pinna of nine to sixteen pairs of leaflets.
This usage does not exclude fewer than three pinna-pairs in smaller leaves or fewer than nine pairs of leaflets in shorter pinnae.
Similarly only maximum dimensions of leaflets are recorded.
The larger leaflets may be situated near the middle or much beyond the middle of each pinna.
The width of the last pair of leaflets, which are often no longer but conspicuously wider than the rest, is deliberately not taken into account.
Each unit of the mimosa leaf is articulate with its axis of origin by a band of modified tissue: the leaf-stalk to the stem, the pinna to the leafstalk, and the leaflet to the pinna-rachis.
These usually turgid, but in a few species much reduced or obsolete and insensitive joints, in thefirsttwo positions called/7w/vz>2/ and in the third pulvinuh, are the means by which the leaf falls, retracts, or folds on itself at nightfall or at touch.
In sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa a band of sensitive tissue extending across the rachis of each pinna and continuous with the pulvinuli of each pair of leaflets provides additional joints whereby the pinna itself contracts in the manner of a clenched finger.
In most, but not quite all, species of Mimosa one may find at base of each pinna, next above the pulvinus, a pair of usually minute blades, called stipels by Bentham, though not homologous with the stipels of other (e.g., phaseoloid) Leguminosae.
Genuine stipels subtend the pulvinule of a leaflet, whereas these structures in Mimosa, as in some other genera of Mimosaceae, arise above it.
In contradistinction to tme stipels these appendages are called paraphyllidia.
When somewhat dilated, as characteristicafly in sect. Batocaulon ser. Stipellares, the paraphyllidia are readily seen to be a diminished first pair of leaflets, similar to the pair of leaflets next above them and like these often somewhat heteromorphic, the one on the proximal side of the pinnarachis a little the larger.
Leaflets of Mimosa are normally entire, bluntly toothed only in the Cuban M. fagaracantha, and marginally undulate only in a few species in which the secondary nerves anastomose with a strong marginal nerve.
In a few species of sect. Batocaulon leaflets are suppressed or very early caducous, the function of photosynthesis being transferred to stems or dilated leaf-stalks.
In Paraguayan M. equisetum the early leaves are normally bipinnate and later ones, developed above the fertile leaf-axils, are reduced to linear phyllodes.
The venation of the Mimosa leaflet is basically palmate, though when the leaflet is relatively narrow only the midrib, either centric to the blade or variably displaced toward its anterior margin, is extemally visible.
In ampler leaflets the primary nerves arising from the pulvinule become variably branched and those of the second order are most often a camptodrome within the margin, only rarely (sect. Batocaulon ser. Caesapiniifoliae; some taxa of sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosd) they are produced into it.
In the largest leaflets a tertiary venulation or a reticulum is superficially elaborated.
Most commonly the primary palmate nerves are progressively shorter and weaker outward from the midrib's proximal side; but in some groups of sects.
Habbasia and Mimosa the midrib and one or more primary nerves on either side of it are of nearly equal strength and run paraUel almost or quite the length of the blade.
Venulation of leaflets is characteristic of the species but only exceptionally contributes to supraspecific classification, identical patterns of branching having seemingly arisen repeatedly in otherwise disparate and presumably only distantly related lineages.
6.
Inflorescence.
Properly speaking the term inflorescence should apply to the whole flowering system of a plant, but in the literature of Mimosaceae it can be and often is used elliptically to signify the capitate or spicate-racemose complements offloretsof which the whole inflorescence consists.
In Mimosa the partial inflorescences arise in these ways: a) singly from the axil of contemporary leaves; b) in axillary fascicles that correspond to efoliate branchlets with greatly contracted primary axis; c) in 14 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 panicles or pseudoracemes of either solitary or fasciculate peduncles; d) from brachyblasts which may be either foliate or not at time of anthesis; f) rarely from efoliate branches arising from annotinous wood below the foliate branch-tips; and g) in few members of subser. Polycephalae on a scapiform peduncle accompanied by radical leaves.
The architecture of the inflorescence is ordinarily characteristic of the species and therefore taxonomically useful.
In the past strong emphasis has been laid on a distinction between the capitulum and the spike.
Ordinarily there is no difficulty here, yet intermediate states do occur: dense ellipsoid capitula with flowers crowded on an elongate receptacle, and short spikes, perceived as such because their receptacular axis, although in fact no longer than that of some ellipsoid capitula, is visible between less crowdedflowers.
Bentham attached high systematic importance to the difference between spike and capitulum, although not even-handedly so.
While his otherwise heterogeneous ser. Leptostachyae was characterized solely by spicate flowers, he admitted both spike and capitulum to ser. Lepidotae (secX.
Calothamnos of this revision), a group characterized by peculiar indumentum and floral morphology.
Elsewhere, undue respect for density of the partial inflorescence contrived to separate spicate M. platycarpa from the very closely related but capitate M. acantholoba, and spicate Mm. myriadena and pithecolobioides from capitate kindred in ser. Glanduliferae.
Discoveries since 1875 of spicate mimosas which in sum of characters have unmistakable kinship to hitherto capitate groups are M. (ser. Acanthocarpae) nanchititlana, M. (ser. Cordistipulae) xiquexiquensis, M. (ser. Rojasianae) chacoensis, M. (ser. Habbasia) miranda.
Mm. (sect. Mimosa) balduinii and niederleinii, and an as yet undescribed spicate member of ser. Stipellares (Fortunato, in press).
The capitate species Mm. antioquensis, lemniscata and leptocarpa, none of which were known to Bentham, are most closely akin to spicate Mm. spiciflora and rhodostachya, and herein are referred together with them to a ser. Plurijugae of sect. Batocaulon.
The differentiation of capitulum from spike (or vice versa), which involves no more than differential growth of floral axis between insertion of the flowers, must have occurred at different stages of evolution in Mimosa and therefore must be evaluated, as a taxonomic character, with greater caution than has been customary.
The bracts that subtend spicate flowers are invariably smafl, and conceal the flowers, if at all, only in early praefloration.
Bracts in the capitulum vary greatly in size and in persistence, contributing materially to its overall aspect, either when young or permanently, and sometimes provide a useful criterion for separation of related taxa.
Capitula in which the flower-buds are concealed up to (and rarely into) anthesis by imbricate bracts are termed conelike; those in which the flower-buds early surpass their bract and together form a spherical or ovoid mass suggestive of a Rubus or Morus syncarp are termed moriform.
In few species the bracts themselves are shorter than the subtended flower, but their fringe of cilia conceals the flower-buds in a mesh of setae.
7- Flowers.
When casually observed, the radially symmetrical, usually small flowers of Mimosa are monotonously uniform, their most conspicuous elements being their bmsh of white or pink, rarely citron-yellow filaments terminating in small whitish, yellow, or rarely purple, dorsifixed anthers.
On closer examination a considerable range of variation appears: i) Number ofparts. —The perianth of Mimosa varies from trimerous to pentamerous, with random abnormal instances of higher numbers.
The androecium is almost constantly either exactly diploor exactly haplostemonous, only very seldom irregular in number (ser. Fagaracanthae in particular), or in sect. Calothamnos composed of two whorls, one perfect altemipetalous and one antepetalous staminodal.
In some subseries of ser. Mimosa, of which most flowers are tetramerous and haplostemonous, some few flowers at base of the capitulum may be 4-5-merous, staminate, and diplostemonous, a random anomaly overestimated by B. L. Robinson (1898) as defining a sect. Astatandra. ii. Sex andform. —Staminate flowers are commonly found toward the base of the partial inflorescence, both spicate and capitulate, passing upward into perfect ones, which are often a trifle longer and proportionately narrower.
In other respects the flowers of a given species or of any unit of its inflorescence are essentially monomorphic.
There are no completely asexual flowers and no terminal heteromorphic one as occurs frequently in tribe Ingeae.
In hundreds of flowers dissected I found only two instances of a reduplicated ovary, which must be considered freakish in this genus. ///.
Calyx. —In its most generalized form, prevalent in sect. Batocaulon but not confined to that section, the calyx is campanulate, short-toothed, weakly nerved, and about one-third to one-half as long as the fully expanded corolla.
The teeth are valvately connivent at an early stage of development, but the immature corolla emerges from it long before anthesis, and its protective function is therefore short-lived.
In texture this primitive type of calyx varies from thinly herbaceous to membranous, and the cilia of its orifice are weak hairs or minute gland-tipped setulae, never paleaceous in texture.
Early modifications are the elimination of teeth and a consequently truncate orifice, and reduction of size in relation to the corolla.
In sect. Calothamnos the calyx varies from campanulate to saucershaped, or may be reduced to a scarcely concave disc at base of the corolla.
Incipiently in sect. Habbasia and more frequently and decisively in sect. Mimosa, the texture of the calyx-teeth or of the whole calyx becomes dry and scarious.
Calyces of this consistency are called paleaceous when simply lobed, pappiform when each lobe is divided either to the very base of the calyx or to the rim of a short tube, and paleaceous-pappiform when the lobes are distinctly differentiated but each is deeply lacerate or decompound.
The calyx of many species of ser. Mimosa is reduced to a minute collar at base of the corolla or is essentially eliminated except for a barely perceptible rim.
Despite some small variation in absolute dimensions and in relative length of tube and lobes, the calyx is generally characteristic of a species and often of higher groups. iv. Corolla. —The corolla of Mimosa varies in length from about 1.5 to 7 mm and in form from obconic-campanulate when relatively short to subcylindric when longer.
The lobes vary from a trifle longer than to scarcely one-third as long as the tube.
The tube is not infrequently constricted at base and there coheres to the androecium in the form of a stemonozone, the tube of which encloses only the short stipe or at best the very base of the ovary.
The number of corollalobes is normally stable within a given plant and within its species, but multiplication of lobes and union of contiguous ones are encountered in random flowers.
These are so few, however, that there is seldom any doubt as to the prevalent or normal number.
Ordinarily each corolla-lobe is finely 1 -nerved, but in a few series of sect. Habbasia and in some subseries of ser. Mimosa the lobes are 3-several-nerved.
In sect. Batocaulon the corolla-lobes are membranous and either plane or only shallowly concave ventrally, whereas in many groups of sect. Mimosa they are boat-shaped and somewhat comeously thickened.
In the first case the flower-bud is pyriform or subglobose, in the second it is more or less deeply sulcate between the lobes.
While the extremes are notably distinct, intermediate states are found in sects.
Habbasia and Mimosa.
Length ofcorolla, both absolute and relative to the calyx, and the venation and indumentum of its lobes provide useful taxonomic markers.
V. Androecium.—IrrespectiYe of number (see section i above), the filaments of the androecium are either a) wholly free both from the corolla and from each other, or b) united to the base of the corolla but not to each other, or c) free from the corolla but monadelphous into a tube for the most part shorter than the ovary but in some subseries of ser. Mimosa enclosing the ovary in a tube.
They may be exactly linear or dilated and ribbonlike distally, commonly more or less bifacial but in few species relatively stout and subterete.
In color they vary from white or whitish to pink or pink-purple, and in most species of sect. Calothamnos are creamor sulfur-yellow.
Field-notes that record floral coloration in Mimosa usually refer to color of the filaments, which form the most conspicuous part of the inflorescence at anthesis, not to the color of the corolla, which varies from greenish or whitish to dull purplish-pink or less often bright carmine, especially on the inner face of the lobes.
Color of the filaments is poorly preserved in most dried specimens and is consequently of little practical use in identification, even though, as in sect. Calothamnos, it is potentially significant.
The anthers of Mimosa are dorsifixed and consist of two C-shaped thecae folded around the margin of a dilated connective.
In most sections of the genus the connective is suborbicular in dorsal view and completely surrounded by the thecae.
In sect. Mimadenia it is ovate in outline and 16 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 sometimes distally produced between the apex of the thecae into a short point, though this never bears the glandular appendage characteristic of Adenopodia and Piptadenia s. str. Pollen of Mimosa has been investigated systematically by Guinet (1969, passim) and by Caecavari (1985, 1986a, 1987).
The grains are aggregated into tetrads, bitetrads, and tritetrads.
The last have been recorded only in sect. Mimadenia.
Bitetrads are prevalent in sects.
Batocaulon and Habbasia, but simple tetrads occur in both these sections.
Polyads of four grains variably aligned are universal in sects.
Calothamnos and Mimosa.
Caccavari has traced a highly plausible evolutionary sequence between the smallest tetradic pollen and progressively larger and more complex aggregations of grains.
Her interpretation of the direction of this evolutionary sequence is disputed in the section "Evolutionary Sequences."
vi. Gynoecium. —The ovary of Mimosa, whether sessile or shortly stipitate, is oblong-ellipsoid and somewhat laterally compressed, and is abruptly contracted at apex into an almost always filiform style as long as or longer than the stamens and terminating in an erect poriform stigma.
In very few species the style is dilated at apex into a narrow funnel.
In two species of sect. Mimosa ser. Myriophyllae the style is very much shorter than the stamens and not or scarcely exserted from the corolla.
This short style coincides with exceptionally large anthers, a syndrome that suggests a specialized pollination mechanism in need of study.
Ovules, very minute before fertilization, commonly number between four and twenty, but extremes of two and thirty are on record.
So far as known they are consistently uniseriate, as are the seeds.
As a general but imperfect rule ovule-number is six or more in sect. Mimadenia, sect. Batocaulon, and most of sect. Habbasia, and six or less in sects.
Calothamnos and Mimosa.
There exists a broad correlation between ovule-number, complexity of the pollen-polyad, and average number of successfully maturing fruits per unit of inflorescence.
Two divergent fruiting strategies are evolving within the genus: a proliferation of many small fewseeded fruits which require relatively many acts of successful procreation on the part of individually small tetrads; and concentration of more numerous seeds in fewer longer pluriovulate fruits arising from fewer pollinations by larger aggregations of poflen-grains.
8.
Fruits.
The fmit of Mimosa, with few but interesting exceptions, is a craspedium, either sessile or stipitate, consisting of a persistent margin or replum corresponding with the sutural ribs of a conventional legume, and valves that separate from the replum when ripe and simultaneously break up into free-fafling one-seeded articles.
The replum varies from a slender three-ribbed fiber, often depressed between seeds, to a stiffened and straight, laterally dilated and dorsally convex band that at its widest becomes broader than the valves.
It may either preserve its form intact after the valves are shed or may break apart at apex, allowing freer egress to the articles.
The valves vary from thinly papery-membranous to leathery or crustaceous, and their component articles may be either individually dehiscent on separation from the replum or may fall in the shape of an achene.
Variations on this basic pattern, which is found in all sections of the genus, are rather numerous but seem clearly derived from a basic craspedium.
Some fmits of Af. hexandra are essentially loments, transverse fracture between seeds extending across the valves and replum alike.
In distantly related species of several sections the valves separate from the replum along one or both sides, and if on both fall in one piece.
In some Myriophyllae and all the Dolentes the valves of the small pod dehisce from apex downward, gaping to release the one or few seeds.
The replum and valves, but particularly the former, are often armed with recurved aculei or with one or more rows of stiff setae, these exceptionally so many and crowded as to coalesce into a continuous lacerate crest.
The cavity of the strongly compressed craspedium is ordinarily continuous, but when the fmit is turgid membranous septa often develop between seeds.
In some forms ofM. pellita the septa split transversely when the craspedium disarticulates, providing a seal at both ends of each one-seeded joint.
The seeds of Mimosa have been described and figured by Gunn (1984: 96-105, including Schrankia and Schranckiastrum).
They are commonly lentiform or compressed-ellipsoid, but are adaptable to the constraint of the enveloping valves and sometimes distorted thereby.
The funicle is filiform, and the hard testa is smooth or almost so, varying in color from pale fawn to black, and bears on each broad face an open pleurogram about one third to three-fourths as wide as the face itself.
Generally speaking, the seeds of Mimosa are distinctive neither at the specific nor the sectional level.
A notable exception is the globose, buoyant seed of M. bonplandii.
Endosperm is always present, adnate to the testa and often thin.
While variable in length according to the number of fertile articles, the whole fmit is in most essential features stable and characteristic.
9.
Seed-dispersal.
While barren flowers of Mimosa disjoint on withering, the fertilized gynoecium becomes continuous with the floral receptacle and this in turn long and firmly attached to its pedicel.
It follows that dispersal of the seeds follows dehiscence or disarticulation of the pod.
The seeds of the ordinary craspedium fall to the ground either naked or encased in a segment of the valves, this sometimes hispid with erect setae, which may possibly promote dispersal away from the parent plant.
The packaged seed of a few riparian species such as M. pellita are buoyant in water, enabling them to spread rapidly along waterways and over seasonally flooded lowlands.
Seeds of riparian M. bonplandii are shed naked, but float on airpockets within the testa.
Seeds of M. dolens must be shaken out of the gaping fruits by the censer method.
The broad papery articles of the fmit of ser. Glanduliferae seem fitted for wind-dispersal.
The seeds of many mimosas are shiny, though not brightly colored; they may well be taken up by birds and later excreted undamaged, but there is no evidence that this occurs.
Altogether, Mimosa is not notable for specialized dispersalmechanisms.
10.
Chromosomes.
A base chromosome number of x = 13 is indicated for Mimosa by Isely (1971b: 411; 1973: 99), Fedorov (1963: 310), and Lewis and Elias (1981: 166), but aneuploid numbers of 11, 12 and 14, some of them controversial, and instances of polyploidy are recorded.
As yet the chromosomes of only a fraction of the known species have been counted or compared, and the cytogenetics of the genus is an essentially virgin field.
Goldblatt (1981, pt.
2: 435) has shown that thirteen is basic to or at least prevalent in the whole tribe Mimoseae.
EVOLUTIONARY SEQUENCES Having described the morphological features of Mimosa that have proved of practical assistance in delimiting species and groups of species within the genus, I turn to the evaluation of those among them that show promise of evolutionary significance.
My purpose is to place the proposed taxonomy on a rational rather than purely subjective foundation.
I start from the premise that the so-called Piptadenia-gxoup formulated by Lewis and Elias (1981) is indeed a natural, that is monophyletic, assemblage within the isostemonous tribe Mimoseae; and it is in this context that relatively primitive and relatively advanced or specialized character-states will be assessed, and the direction of change determined.
1.
Growth-form and habitat.
It is a reasonable assumption, in the context of the tribe, that the genus is primitively woody and that weak vining and herbaceous growthforms are derived.
Whether the free-standing arborescent life-form gave rise to the woody liana cannot be determined, as we have no knowledge of the ecology of the nascent genus.
Some contemporary woody species are ambivalent in this respect, the mature plant being either erect when isolated or opportunistically sarmentose when crowded; the habit appears then to depend immediately on ecological adaptation and to be essentially labile.
That the tribe Mimoseae and the genus Mimosa have their origins in a macrothermic climate and probably in moist tropical woodland conditions is unlikely to be questioned.
The radiation of the genus into savanna and desert communities, with accompanying modifications in growth-form and armament, would then be a secondary development.
Monocarpic duration is certainly specialized.
2.
Armament and indumentum.
Aculei of one sort or another are found in almost all contemporary groups of Mimosa, and 18 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 for that reason appear to be a basic trait.
Almost all woody Mimoseae are either actually or potentially prickly to some degree, and almost all unarmed ones have more or less specialized, herbaceous or suffruticose growth-habits.
It appears probable, therefore, that the unarmed state is derived.
Because armature type is closely linked with habit, the recurved aculei sparsi of Bentham's vocabulary being associated with weakly woody lianoid habit and vulnerant nodal or infranodal aculei of more or less definite number associated with arborescent stature, no independent assessment of anteriority is required.
Both types of armament occur in Piptadenia, in like association with growth-habit.
Of the sorts of indumentum described above, the small uniseriate hair that is common in Mimosaceae seems certainly a primitive type; it is nearly ubiquitous in Mimosa, often forming an inconspicuous undercoat beneath the more evident setae.
The specialized setiform trichomes have been analyzed into distinct categories characterized by ornamentation (or branching), development of a secretory head, and basal sclerification.
These categories are unevenly distributed through the genus.
With one exception (M. galeottii) plain setae are unknown in sect. Batocaulon, whereas eglandular setae of some sort are found almost throughout sects.
Habbasia, Calothamnos and Mimosa, in the last two almost but not quite to the exclusion of gland-tipped ones, which are frequent but not universal in sects.
Batocaulon and Habbasia.
Dendritic (or stellate) setae, common to all species of sect. Calothamnos, occur rarely in sects.
Habbasia and Mimosa, exceptionally in sect. Batocaulon.
The peltate or pileiform trichomes peculiar to ser. Myriadeniae and Glanduliferae have no counterpart elsewhere in Mimosa or, so far as I can find, elsewhere in the tribe Mimoseae.
Thus trichomes of Mimosa, being correlated with other morphological features, contribute something to the definition of species-groups, but provide no definitive marker of any except in sect. Mimadenia.
It is not possible to marshall the modified types of seta into one unidirectional developmental series.
It may be rationally supposed that the plain seta is primitive, but the rest may have evolved from this independently, each becoming frequent or dominant in particular evolutionary lines.
3.
Stipules.
Simple one-nerved stipules that occur in all sections of Mimosa can safely be identified as the primitive, undifferentiated type, whereas plurinervate, striately multinervate, and coriaceous, extemally nerveless ones are derived.
Dilated stipules are commonest, but not universal, in sect. Habbasia, and only exceptional in sects.
Batocaulon and Mimosa.
While they may be highly distinctive at the specific level, no useful phylogenetic inference can be drawn from them.
4.
Petiolar nectaries and spicules.
The petiolar nectary is of such wide occurrence among disparate genera of Mimosaceae and Caesalpiniaceae that its archaic character, generally interpreted as evidence of an ant-plant symbiotic relationship, seems wholly plausible.
It could have arisen de novo many times, but it is more economical to envisage it as a hereditary character that has been lost in advanced groups such as the genus Neptunia or the greater part of the genus Mimosa.
As a primitive character the nectary of Mimosa sect. Mimadenia connects the genus to Adenopodia and Piptadenia, although in some other respects, notably the indumentum of ser. Glanduliferae and Myriadeniae, the section is an advanced one.
The interpinnal spicule, here interpreted as the degenerate rudiment of an interpinnal nectary, would then be seen as an archaic organ that has lost its function.
The spicule is most prevalent in sect. Batocaulon, where it is sometimes modified into a spine or dilated into a subfoliaceous blade.
It becomes rare and sporadic in the haplostemonous sect. Mimosa, and in sect. Calothamnos is completely suppressed.
5.
Leaves.
The relatively finely bipinnate leaf that prevails in almost all genera of Mimosaceae and survives in the eophyfls of some phyllodal Acaciae presumably preserves an archaic pattem.
Worldwide there is great flexibility in leaf-formula, within the genus and often within the individual species, but it appears to me that a marked reduction of leaf-divisions, whether of pinnae or of leaflets, to definite and low numbers. can everywhere safely be accepted as a derived character-state.
These simplified leaf-pattems are very unequally distributed through the sections of Mimosa, where they must have made several independent appearances in what are judged (on multiple dissimilarities) to be distantly related evolutionary lines.
Pinnae reduced to one or two, or stabilized at one pair are known in ser. Glanduliferae of sect. Mimadenia; in ser. Distachyae, Rubicaules (both in South America and in Madagascar), Ceratoniae, and monotypic Auriculatae, all of sect. Batocaulon; in one species of Piresianae in sect. Habbasia; and in several species of sect. Calothamnos.
Except in the case of M. auriculata, ofwhich no close relative has been recognized, each species of these groups that is characterized by conjugate or at most two pairs of pinnae per leaf has a close relative differing in higher leaf-formula.
In sect. Mimosa the situation is different.
Here we find one small ser. Myriophyllae with conventionally pluripirmate leaves, and the extremely large and internally heterogeneous ser. Mimosa, the majority of whose members have pinnae stabilized at exactly one pair per leaf.
A small minority of taxa referred to ser. Mimosa and its small satellite ser. Modestae because of their indumentum and tetramerous haplostemonous flower have more than one pair of pinnae per leaf, but the pairs, except in M. discobola, M. teledactyla, and M. distans ex parte, are crowded beyond the middle of the leafstalk or are palmately displayed at its apex.
It seems possible that these are examples of reversal, in which extra pairs of pinnae have been acquired by reduplication of the terminal pair.
No plausible origin can be found outside conjugately pinnate ser. Mimosa for such palmately pinnate species as M. polydactyla or M. lupinoides.
In ser. Mimosa, but not elsewhere in the genus, a leaf-formula incorporating more than one pair of pinnae is consequently considered an advanced character.
The leaves of individual Mimosa species are rich in specialized features, but these throw little light on the evolutionary sequences in the genus.
Noteworthy are: partial or complete loss of leaflets, known only in sect. Batocaulon, but there in three mutually remote series, the planaltine Paucifoliatae, the AntiUean Fagaracanthae, and the Argentine Ephedroideae; proliferation of secondary and tertiary venulation of leaflets, occurring whenever the blade is substantially dilated; production of the secondary veins of the leaflet to its margin, achieved in diplostemonous ser. Caesalpiniifoliae 2ind some members of haplostemonous subser. Mimosa; in the last-named retrodecurrence of the homy cilia into a continuous marginal nerve; and the peculiar pulvinular structure of sect. Mimosa ser. Modestae.
The mechanism of leaf-movement in Mimosa pudica has been much studied, but we have no systematic data on the sensitivity of foliage in the genus.
Mimosa pigra, the lazy sensitive, was early observed to react much more slowly than M. sensitiva, and there is some evidence that mature woody mimosae generally respond less rapidly to shock or to touch than the herbaceous species.
In some, perhaps all members of the habitally specialized ser. Mimosa subser. Microcarpae the leaf-pulvinus is much reduced or even obsolete, the leaf-stalk therefore scarcely articulate, though the leaflets retain the ability of folding on one another at night.
6.
Inflorescence.
The least specialized inflorescence encountered in Mimosa consists of a series of spikes (or spiciform racemes) that develop pari passu with new foliage ofthe season.
The passage from spike to capitulum, by means ofwhich the individually inconspicuous flowers are concentrated into a compound structure and may contribute either pollen only or both pistil and pollen to a common reproductive purpose, has been reenacted many times in the history of angiosperm evolution, and by analogy the capitulum of Mimosa is certainly a derived state.
There is evidence in this genus, however, that the spike is not necessarily primitive, for reversals may have taken place, and a secondary elongation ofthe receptacular axis have occurred, Such would most easily account for spicate species isolated among otherwise similar capitate ones, or the reverse.
In sect. Mimosa the spike of Mm. dutrae, niederleinii and balduinii is very likely derived, whereas the spike seems anterior to the capitulum in sects.
Batocaulon and Calothamnos.
In each case the majority preserve the prior state, which of necessity must be evaluated in the context of affinities established by other criteria.
The architecture of the entire inflorescence seems to have developed on these lines: delayed expansion of the foliage, by means ofwhich flowers are temporarily emphasized at expense of foliage and displayed to greater advantage; retraction of the flowering shoot into a brachyblast, which may be leafless (as in spicate M. hebecarpa) or accompanied by fasciculate leaves simpler than those of barren long-shoots (as in capitate Boreales); the ordination of capitula into elongate efoliate pseudoracemes or, alternatively, into a series arising vertically from leaf-axils of a humifuse stem; and ultimately the reduction of the inflorescence to a few radical or subradical peduncles.
The inflorescence is no more than one aspect of general habit, and, like habit, seems to have undergone parallel modifications as different lineages moved out of forest habitats into savanna, desert, or more narrowly specialized environments.
The pseudoraceme terminating in one large, precociously flowering capitulum, developed in M. dolens and its protean issue, suggests some biological specialization of unknown function.
The bract subtending the flower bud in a mimosa spike is always small and appears to have no useful function.
Small bracts give rise in some capitula to larger ones that shield the flower buds in a protective cone until just before anthesis.
I regard a conelike capitulum as derived, but it has appeared independently more than once.
Spasmodic massfloweringin Mimosa has been described by Burkart (1948: 32) in M. polycarpa var. spegazzinii, in cultivation at San Isidro, and in M. neptunioides, wild in Bolivia, by Jose Steinbach (7067. field-notes), who recorded that on April 6, 1925, flowering plants of this species appeared dominant in the landscape, whereas on the morning of April 7 not a flower was to be seen.
Synchronized anthesis is, however, not ubiquitous in Mimosa, and its study, which will require prolonged field-observation, may eventually contribute to a hypothesis of progressively specialized pollination in this genus.
Dr. Howard Irwin observed (pers. comm.) in several planaltine species the activation of flowering by rain following several dry days.
Flowers.
The aspects of the flower that offer evidence of intrageneric evolution in Mimosa are their sexuality and the number of their parts.
Exact study of the first, which requires dissection and often the sacrifice of whole partial inflorescences, cannot be carried out effectively in the herbarium, and requires study of whole plants and whole plant-populations in the field.
To the best of my knowledge the individual Mimosa plant is never entirely staminate, though some partial inflorescences (capitula) may be so.
The flowers of the partial inflorescence are almost always either uniformly hermaphrodite, or andromonoecious, when some or many proximal ones are functionally staminate, having only a sterile pistil or none at all, and only some distal flowers are perfect.
In the uncommon condition that Burkart labelled (not too happily) ambistemony, known so far to occur only in some species of sect. Mimosa, some few lower male flowers of an andromonoecious capitulum have a supplementary whorl of functional stamens.
The fully hermaphrodite partial inflorescence is commonest in the spike of sect. Batocaulon.
Andromonoecy is the prevailing state in capitula of all sections; and ambistemony, confirmed to ser. Mimosa, occurs randomly in subseries not immediately related to one another.
Uniformly hermaphrodite capitula that are potentially fully fertile occur in some species of sect. Mimosa ser. Myriophyllae and in M. dolens, possibly also in the diplostemonous monocarpic M. simplicissima.
In the fully fertile spike of pluriovulate flowers the number successfully fertilized is low, and a high proportion of ovaries is wasted.
Andromonoecy, and the specialized ambistemony, redress the imbalance.
In the fully hemaphrodite capitulum, on the other hand, each ovary contains only one or two ovules and all or most flowers of the partial inflorescence are successfully fertilized, waste being eliminated by another strategy.
It appears rational to consider sexual heteromorphy within the partial inflorescence as derived and ambistemony no more than a specialized version of it.
The recovery of fufl hermaphroditism in the capitula ofser.
Myriophyllaeis interpreted as equally specialized in its own way.
Sex of the individual flower is mediated by a balance between total resources of pollen and ovules.
Since Bentham's reorganization of the mimosoid Leguminosae in 1875, the number of flower-parts, and especially the number of stamens, has been fundamental to classification of the family, and in Mimosa, where the numbers vary, to classification of the genus.
Here the calyx and corofla are conventionally isomerous, but the calyx is in so many species reduced or deformed that in practice only the divisions of the corolla are considered.
The corolla is either 6-, 5-, 4- or 3-merous, the number generally being characteristic of the species, but liable to some random variation in some units of an inflorescence, this more frequent when the norm is five and almost invariable when the norm is three.
In the context of the family and the Piptadenia group of tribe Mimoseae it seems certain that a pentamerous corolla is primitive and that tetramery and trimery are progressive specializations.
Elias (in Polhifl & Raven, 1981: 148) has proposed that a decandrous androecium (implying a pentamerous perianth) is basic in Mimosoideae, and both higher and lower numbers of stamens are derived.
In Mimosa haplostemony is derived by suppression of the antepetalous whorl of the primitively diplostemonous androecium, rudiments of which survive in the flower of some species of Mimosa sect. Calothamnos.
This sequence of events seems undeniable, but it is far from certain that haplostemony occurred only once in the genus or that sect. Mimosa as defined by Bentham is monophyletic.
On the contrary, it seems persuasively probable that haplostemonous M. myriadenia, for reasons elaborated below in discussion of sect. Mimadenia, is more closely akin to diplostemonous ser. Glanduliferae than to any element of sect. Mimosa sensu Bentham; that haplostemonous ser. Spiciflorae (ser. Plurijugae of this revision) was misplaced in sect. Mimosa, finding much closer affinities in sect. Batocaulon; and that the so-called Mornicolae (Britton & Rose, 1928: 145), despite a sometimes perfect (but more often irregular) loss of the inner whorl of stamens, are properly to be reunited with sympatric ser. Fagaracanthae.
It follows that loss of numbers in the perianth and in the androecium have been mutually independent developments, and that the classic division of Mimosa into two sections, diplostemonous Habbasia and haplostemonous Mimosa, although vigorously upheld by Burkart (1948: 23), is a simplification.
The ser. Lepidotae Bentham, referred by Bentham to sect. Mimosa because of haplostemony, is intimately linked on the one hand with sect. Batocaulon and more tenuously, through its few conjugately pinnate and pink-flowered members, to sect. Mimosa' it is more fitly interpreted as an independent haplostemonous derivative of diplostemonous ancestry and treated as an autonomous section of the genus.
If these adjustments to the sectional organization of Mimosa are accepted, reduction of perianth-number and simplification of the androecium will be found very unequally distributed in the genus: in Batocaulon the full range of perianth-numbers but haplostemony in only one small series; in sect. Mimosa a tetramerous haplostemonous flower virtually stabilized; in sect. Habbasia a tetramerous diplostemonous one nearly universal.
I postulate that a moderate complement of ovules, perhaps eight to fourteen or thereabouts, numbers common throughout the Leguminosae, is in Mimosa anterior to numbers higher and lower.
This range is common in sect. Batocaulon, which provides, however, examples also of much greater numbers and a few of lower ones, as does sect. Habbasia; whereas the average in sects.
Calothamnos and Mimosa is consistently low, varying from two to six or rarely eight.
Ovule-number is linked, closely but not exactly, to number of pollen-grains in a polyad of the same flower, the small tetrads of sect. Mimosa being matched by few ovules and the complex polyads of sect. Mimadenia by correspondingly more numerous ovules.
Coevolution in this relationship would be expected.
Caccavari's elegantly researched and finely illustrated studies (1985, 1986a, 1986b, 1987) of Mimosa pollen, enlarging on the pioneer work of Guinet (1969), have demonstrated evolutionary sequences in size, complexity and configuration of the polyad in the whole genus between an extremely small tetrad and a relatively large tetratetrad, and in the sect. Calothamnos (or ser. Lepidotae) between globose tetrahedral and twodimensional foursquare tetrads.
These sequences, the reality of which is not disputed, Caccavari has coordinated with gross morphology and (in Lepidotae) with dispersal.
Arguing from the hypothesis that small tetrads have given rise to progressively more complex ones, she points to sect. Mimosa as preserving the archetypal mimosa from which arose, perhaps through more than one lineage, the derived sect. Habbasia.
The direction of evolutionary change postulated by Caccavari runs counter to all propositions of priority that I have advanced up to this point.
It implies that the largely suffmticose or herbaceous subseries of ser. Mimosa with prevailingly conjugate pinnae, a specialized setose indumentum, calyces either rudimentary or paleaceouspappiform, haplostemonous flowers, and few ovules, the majority of them adapted to a savanna ecology and many of them extratropical in dispersal, represent the ancestral types from which arose the tropical trees and vines with plurijugate pinnae, simple indumentum, undifferentiated campanulate calyx, diplostemonous flowers and moderate or high complement of ovules.
It is the latter type through which Mimosa finds a connection with the circumtropical Piptadenia-allmnce, and in particular with Adenopodia and Piptadenia s. str. I cannot estimate the theoretical difficulties of admitting a pollensequence that involves simplification ofthe compound grain, but they cannot be more formidable than those attending a derivation of sects.
Batocaulon, Habbasia, or Mimadenia from sect. Mimosa.
I emphatically endorse Burkart's view (1948: 29) of the primitive status of sect. Habbasia (which is Batocaulon + Habbasia sens, restr. of this account) and a climactic stage of evolution in ser. Sensitivae (subser. Mimosa of this account), an evaluation implicit in Bentham's treatment of the genus.
Burkart and Caccavari alike have misunderstood the linear sequence of sections and series in Bentham's work, assuming that it must progress from primitive to advanced, an arrangement which Caccavari invoked as support for her evolutionary hypothesis but from which Burkart expressed a strong dissent.
Insofar as Bentham entertained thoughts of evolutionary progress, and one cannot doubt that the notion was there even though he lacked the modem vocabulary to give it voice, his order is always the same, progressing from the more to the less specialized.
In his great systematic and floristic treatises on Leguminosae for Genera plantarum (1865) and Flora brasiliensis (1876) the Papilionaceae precede the Caesalpiniaceae, and these in turn the Mimosaceae; in his account of Acacia it is the phyllodial species that are in the van whfle the less differentiated Vulgares bring up the rear; and in the Papilionaceae the tribal roUcall proceeds from Podalyrieae and Genisteae to Sophoreae and Swartzieae.
A reversal of Bentham's sequence of presentation merely adapts this work to a modem convention; it does not challenge but rather confirms his perceptions of phylogeny.
8.
Fruits.
I take the craspedium, because it is found in most species of each major division of Mimosa, to be the archetypal fruit of the genus, and departures from the archetype to be specialized.
The latter are relatively few, and almost all involve thickened or broadened replum, valves, or both.
A wide replum is associated in sect. Batocaulon ser. Quadrivalves and one species of ser. Stipellares, in sect. Habbasia ser. Pachycarpae, and in one member of sect. Mimosa ser. Sparsae with valves falling in one piece or valvately dehiscent in situ.
In other groups the valves fall entire, but from a replum not notably dilated: of sect. Batocaulon the ser. Acanthocarpae, Acantholobae and Ceratoniae and one species of ser. Boreales, of sect. Habbasia one species of ser. Bipinnatae, and of sect. Mimosa the subser. Microcarpae, Pogocephalae and M. widgrenii.
Idiosyncratic specialization is seen in the small, apically gaping pod of M. dolens and some Myriophyllae, in the very broad, almost leaflike valves of M. acantholoba, in the fringed replum of M. bahamensis and M. lacearata, and in the strange little spirally incurved craspedium of M. spirocarpa.
I cannot detect any broad continuous current of specialization in the basic craspedium of Mimosa, but rather multiple independent variations, mostly at the level of species.
Orientation of the seeds is determined by or adjusted to width of the cavity and length of the articles.
In a broad fmit the seeds fall horizontal to its long diameter, but when constricted turn obliquely or even vertically downward.
Ordinarily they are well spaced in an orderly row, but when crowded together may become distorted by mutual pressure.
When the cavity is dilated the endocarp is often produced between seeds in the form of membranous partitions.
These seem merely mechanical adjustments without phylogenetic significance.
SUMMARY OF EVOLUTIONARY PROGRESSIONS IN MIMOSA In summary, I conclude that these assumptions of evolutionary progression are most plausible, although some of them may have been subject to reversal in individual cases: Anterior/Primitive Posterior/Derived Habit: Armament: Setae: Stipules: Petiolar nectary: Leaf-formula: Leaflet-venation: Inflorescence: Calyx: Corolla: Androecium: Poflen: Ovules: Replum of pod: Fruit-dehiscence: Tree, shmb, woody vine, polycarp Aculei of definite number, nodal or infranodal Linear, basifixed, eglandular, smooth Narrow, 1-3-nerved Present, functional Pinnae and leaflets of moderate number; pinnae scattered Brochidodrome Axillary; flowers spicate, all hermaphrodite Campanulate membranous, toothed or truncate 5-(6)-merous, the lobes membranous 1-nerved Diplostemonous, filaments free, connective ovate In large or moderate, compound tetrads Of moderate number (±6-14) Slender Craspedial Subshrub, suffrutescent vine, herb, monocarp Aculei numerous, scattered on stem and leaf-stalks Basally enlarged or decurrent, basally spurred, gland-tipped, scabrous/plumose Dilated, striately pluri-nerved, coriaceous Reduced to non-functinal spicule, obsolete Either pinnae or leaflets very many or exactly one pair; pinnae palmate Craspedodrome Paniculate, pseudoracemose, radical; flowers capitate, the lower staminate Paleaceous-pappiform, obsolescent 4-, then 3-merous, lobes either thickened or several-nerved Haplostemonous, filaments monadelphous, connective orbicular In small simple tetrads Numerous (16+) or 2-6 Dilated Valvate These sequences, which form the conceptual criteria on which the classification of Mimosa is based, can have developed neither continuously nor in synchrony, so that particular species and groups of species possess mixtures of conservatively primitive and highly evolved characters, the relative significance of which can only be subjectively assessed.
Possibly some of these syndromes of coexistent primitive and advanced states may be due to reticulate introgression, but of this there is no concrete evidence.
The effects of multidirectional radiation obviously cannot be eflfectively displayed in linear form, and consequently the sequential ordination of taxa is perforce arbitrary to some degree.
Of great importance in the evaluation of relationships are the geographic ranges and ecological adaptations which deeply influence the overall taxonomic picture and are discussed in the taxonomic text as occasion arises.
ETYMOLOGY OF MIMOSA The word Mimosa is derived from the Spanish mimoso, meaning sensitive, in allusion to the thigmotactic foliage of some species known in pre-Linnaean times.
It was first applied to a plant, probably not a true species of Mimosa Linnaeus, in the vernacular form yerva mimosa, by Crist6bal Acosta (1578: 241), and later by John Parkinson (1640: 1617), as a more formal Latin generic name, to plants grown (but not to maturity) at Chelsea.
Parkinson mistakenly derived miquestioned by B. L. Robinson (1898: 307).
The mosa from the Latin mimus, mime or mimic, a misconception was laid to rest by E. L. Greene false etymology confirmed by Toumefort (1700: (1901: 95).
606) and thereafter universally accepted until Conspectus of sections of genus Mimosa (very few rare anomalies not accounted for) * Petiolar nectaries present A. sect. Mimadenia Bameby ** Petiolar nectaries none;flsdiplostemonous (rare haplostemonous exceptions, but these without either branched or basaUy dUated setae); trichomes all simple, if some setiform the Ift-cilia not basally dilated; perianth never yellow B. sect. Batocaulon DeCandolle *** Petiolar nectaries none; fls haplostemonous (sometimes with an inner cycle of staminodia); trichomes arborescently ramulose or stelliform; perianth often (not consistently) yellow C. sect. Calothamnos Bameby **** Like ** (but no haplostemony); trichomes, including some Ift-cilia, basally dilated and setiform; perianth never yellow D. sect. Habbasia DeCandoUe ***** Petiolar nectaries none; fls haplostemonous; trichomes (few exceptions) simple; Ift-cilia and often other setiform trichomes basally dilated; perianth never yellow E. sect. Mimosa Hypothetical phylogeny of Mimosa Mimosa sect. Mimosa T Mimosa sect. Habbasia Mimosa sect. Calothamnos Mimosa sect. Batocaulon t Mimosa sect. Mimadenia T Piptadenioid Ancestors Key to sections of genus Mimosa 1.
Lf-stks charged either below or between the first pair of pinnae with an excretory nectary A. sect. Mimadenia (p. 25).
1.
Lf-stks lacking nectary.
2.
Fls 3-5(-6)-merous, diplostemonous except in ser. Plurijugae (p. 000) and few spp. ofFagaracanthae (p. 000), these lacking either basaUy dilated or steUate cauline setae.
3.
Stems lacking basally dilated, appressed or spreading setae, or if stems hispidly setose or setaculeate the If-axes and Ift-margins merely pubemlent or naked; corolla lobes never striately nerved.
B. sect. Batocaulon (p. 61).
3.
Stems, If-axes and often Ift-margins either strigose or hispid with fine tapering, or basally dilated, or bulbous, often flagelliform setae, if the Ift-margins naked the corolla-lobes several-nerved.
.
D. sect. Habbasia (p. 347).
2.
Fls almost constantly 4-merous and haplostemonous (rare fls at base of capitulum diplostemonous but sterile).
Indumentum of stems and Ift-faces largely or wholly composed of plumose or steUiform setae, but lfts not ciliate with basally dilated or basally retrocurrent setae; filaments in most spp. yeUow or yellowish, in a few pink but the coroUa then stellate C. sect. Calothamnos (p. 313).
Indumentum of stems and Ift-faces of simple trichomes, if some of these plumose the filaments pink and the corolla not stellate; lfts almost always ciliate with basally dilated or retrocurrent setae (these lacking only in a few, elsewhere glabrous, nowhere stellate spp. of subser. Sparsae).
E. sect. Mimosa (p. 490).
A. Sectio MIMADENIA Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimadenia Bameby, sect, nov., ab aliis Mimosae gregibus foliomm petiolis glandula crateriformi vel obesa instmctis antherisque de visu dorsali ovatis nec suborbicularibus diversa.—Typus infra sub serie typica Glanduliferis indicatur.
Vines and shrubs, the former serially aculeate and either macroor micro-phyllidious, the latter microphyllidious and variously armed.
Indumentum eglandular but otherwise diverse, as described under individual series.
Stipules subulate-setiform, 1-nerved or extemally nerveless, rarely narrowly ligulate.
Leaf-stalks charged below or between proximal pinna-pair with a cupular or mounded and small-pored nectary; Ifformula diverse.
Units of inflorescence either spikes or capitula, and either axillary or paniculate.
Flowers either 4- or 5-merous, either diploor (M. myriadenia) haplostemonous; anthers in dorsal view ovate, the connective sometimes produced between the sacs, but never glandtipped.
Fruit either a craspedium or (M. revoluta) valvate, but unknown in ser. Nothacaciae.
Spp. 15, of which 14 native in and all but 2 of these confined to tropical S. America, the 2 extending only feebly into Central America; 1 endemic to w. Central America and s. Mexico.
The nucleus and much of the substance of sect. Mimadenia consist of ser. Glanduliferae, in which a petiolar nectary and ovate anthers, the signatures of the section, coincide with diplostemonous flowers, capitate in the majority but spicate in two, and peltate-lepidote trichomes.
Of eight Glanduliferae known in 1875 Bentham assembled seven with capitate flowers in the original series of that name, but misplaced spicate M. pithecolobioides in his ser. Leptostachyae, of which all other members have round anthers and lack petiolar nectaries.
Inseparable from Glanduliferae except by loss of the inner whori of stamens, and retaining the distinctive anthers and indumentum, is the pluriracial M. myriadenia, which Bentham, in deference to the simplified androecium, referred to a ser. Spiciflorae in sect. Mimosa.
The historic nucleus and type-species of ser. Spiciflorae resemble M. myriadenia in spicate haplostemonous flowers, but lack petiolar nectaries and have the simple indumentum of sect. Batocaulon.
They are interpreted here, under the title sect. Batocaulon ser. Plurijugae (q.v.,
p. 303), as only remotely related to M. myriadenia and mistakenly associated with it on account of a parallel modification in the flower.
It seems, on the other hand, unlikely in the extreme that petiolar nectaries and peltiform trichomes could arise together (and the latter nowhere else) in two lineages within Mimosa, and I take the relationship between ser. Glanduliferae and ser. Myriadeniae, however widely dissociated by Bentham, as indisputable.
Collectively ser. Glanduliferae and ser. Myriadeniae form a group morphologically intermediate in some respects between Mimosa on the one hand and Adenopodia K. Presl and Piptadenia Bentham (s. lat.) on the other.
In extrafloral nectaries they resemble both these genera, and their ovate anthers are intermediate in form between the orbicular connective, girdled by incurved anther-sacs, of Mimosa and the oblong connective, flanked by straight parallel anthersacs, of Piptadenia.
These anthers, however, lack the terminal gland present in Adenopodia and Piptadenia.
The craspedium of Glanduliferae is not technically different from those of Adenopodia or Entada Adanson, but is incompatible with the inertly valvate legume of Piptadenia.
Their indumentum is peculiar to them alone, unknown elsewhere in Mimoseae.
On these grounds the two series together might conveniently be excised from Mimosa, and would leave the latter more neatly definable, except for three obstacles in the shape of M. revoluta and the pair of Andean mimosas described below under ser. Nothacaciae.
At one point in Bentham's revision (1875: 407) it is stated that petiolar glands occur in Mimosa only in the Glanpendently derived (or independently preserved) duliferae and those Spiciflorae discussed above; in sect. Batocaulon, the species is obviously misthe author momentarily overlooked M. revoluta, placed in sect. Mimadenia, and the peculiar nawhich in spite of an anomalous nectary he reture of Glanduliferae correspondingly enhanced, ferred to sect. Habbasia ser. Acanthocarpae.
MiThe systematic problem involves, however, the mosa revoluta is peculiar for the coincidence of unknown quantities of ser. Nothacaciae, in which a petiolar nectary with a valvately dehiscent pod a perfect Mimosa flower is combined with petvery like that of some compatriot species here iolar nectaries below the first pair of pinnae but constituting sect. Batocaulon ser. Andinae.
The which lack the trichomes of Glanduliferae.
Unnectary on the leaf-stalk of M. revoluta arises fortunately, the fmit of neither is known, and between the first pair and sometimes between judicious assessment of their affinities is not possuccessive pairs of pinnae, in the position ocsible.
If it can be shown that M. revoluta and the cupied, in ser. Andinae, by spicules, with which two Nothacaciae are merely species of Mimosa it may be homologous.
It is in this respect difsect.
Batocaulon anomalous in their genus only ferent from the nectary of Glanduliferae, which for petiolar nectaries, the claims of ser. Glanis situated well below the first pair of pinnae.
If duliferae and Myriadeniae to generic rank will the nectaries of M. revoluta are not of the same deserve further consideration, origin as those of Glanduliferae, but are indeConspectus of sect. Mimadenia Bameby H Peltate or stelliform, reddish or hyaline trichomes almost always present on hypophyllum of lfts and usually on corolla-lobes; mostly vines of moist macrothermic forest, 2 arborescent shrubs of cerrado and caatinga. i. ser. Myriadeniae Bameby.—Fls at once spicate and haplostemonous; If-formula v-xxxiii/8-40.—1 sp., Amazonia n. to Costa Rica, ii. ser. Glanduliferae Bentham.—Rs capitate or exceptionally spicate, diplostemonous; If-formula i-x(-xii)/ 1-11. — 11 spp., widespread from s. Mexico and Belize to tropical e. Brazil and Bolivia.
V\ No peltate or stelliform trichomes; shmbs of semi-xeric environment in the Andes of Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia. iii. ser. Revolutae Bameby.—Lf-nectary between first pair of pinnae; If-formula iii-vi/11-16; fls 5-merous capitate; pod valvately dehiscent.—Sp.
1, of Peru and Bolivia at 2400 m upward. iv. ser. Nothacaciae Bameby.—Lf-nectary below first pair of pinnae; If-formula vii-xix/26-35; fls 4-merous capitate; pod not known.—2 spp., n.-w. Andean Peru and adj. s. Ecuador at ± 1100-2200 m. Key to series of sect. Mimadenia 1.
Fls at once haplostemonous and spicate A(i). ser. Myriadeniae (p. 27).
1.
Rs diplostemonous, commonly capitate but sometimes spicate.
2.
Lf-formula vii-xix/26-35, the largest lfts attaining 3-4.5 x 0.7-1.3 mm; petiolar nectary inserted belowfirstpair of pinnae;fls4-merous; n.-w, Andean Pern (Lambayeque-Piura border) and adjoining Ecuador (Loja); spp. 2 A(iv). ser. Nothacaciae (p. 59).
2.
Lf-formula i-viii/1-17; if microphyllidious and Andean, the petiolar nectary between first pair of pinnae and the fls 5-merous.
3.
Microphyllidious arborescent shmbs of Andean dispersal at elevations above 2000 m; lfts of longer pinnae 11-17-jug. and less than 9 mm long; no scale-like or steUiform trichomes; nectary betweenfirstpair ofpinnae; valves ofpod separating entire from replum; seeds obliquely basipetal; monospecific A(iii).ser.
Revolutae (p. 56).
3.
MacrophylUdious vines, shmbs and rarely treelets, in the Andes only on the Amazon slope and there below 1500 m, extending from s. Mexico to s.-e. Brazil; lfts of longer pinnae 1-10-jug. and the larger ones well over 1 cm long; reddish or pallid, peltate or stellate trichomes commonly present on hypophyllum of lfts and on pod (and often throughout), but these exceptionally lacking; nectary usually well below first pair of pinnae (immediately below only in spp. of eastem upland Brazil s. of Amazonia); valves of pod breaking up into free-falling articles; seeds transverse at middle of pod-valves; species 11 A(ii). ser. Glanduliferae (p. 31).
A(i).
Series MYRIADENIAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimadenia ser. Myriadeniae Barneby, ser. nov., notulis fere omnibus cum ser. Glanduliferis congruae, sed flosculis haplostemoneis diversae.—Sp. typica: M. myriadenia (Bentham) Bentham. —Frutices scandentes crebre aculeatae et trichomatibus peltatis lepidotae, petiolis nectario concavo provisis, foliomm formula eximie variabili (v-xxxiii/8- 40) foliolisque nunc majusculis nunc minimis, inflorescentia paniculata subefoliata, flosculis spicatis, craspediis latiusculis lepidotis notabiles.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Spiciflorae sensu Bentham, 1875: 407, 1876: 344, ex parte, quoad spp. glanduligeras (108, 109), typo excluso.
Prickly scandent shrubs of wet lowland or submontane (Andean) forest, essentially like ser. Glanduliferae except for always 5-merous, haplostemonous fls, these disposed in flexible amentiform spiciform racemes.
Indumentum of plain hairs and minute reddish scales (these exceptionally suppressed).
Stipules subulate, small.
Lfstks charged near base with a cupular nectary; lfformula v-xxxiii/8-40, the longest lfts 3-15 mm.
Inflorescence amply paniculate subefoliate, the flowers white; calyx campanulate ±0.6 mm, broadly denticulate; corolla turbinate 1.3-1.8 mm, the lobes recurved; filaments free.
Pod shortly stipitate, linear-oblong planocompressed, 8-14-seeded, the smooth or aculeolate replum 0.3-0.5 mm diam., the lepidote valves breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles.
Sp.
1, of Amazonia and the Guianas to Costa Rica.
The series Myriadeniae, consisting of one species as labile in leaf-formula as several members of ser. Glanduliferae, has also the leaf-nectaries of the latter, as well as the peculiar peltate trichomes and the ovate anthers, and it differs substantially from ser. Glanduliferae only in haplostemonous flowers.
The similarities outweigh, in myjudgment, the one difference, however useful and important this may have proved hitherto in classification of Mimosa.
I conjecture that loss of one cycle of stamens has occurred more than once in the evolutionary history of the genus, and that M. myriadenia arose in this manner from the same stock as ser. Glanduliferae.
The Myriadeniae also resemble the ser. Plurijugae, with which Bentham associated them, in serially aculeate stems and in haplostemony, but it seems likely that this series, which lacks nectaries and peltate trichomes, had an independent origin in sect. Batocaulon.
1.
Mimosa myriadenia (Bentham) Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 408.
1875.— Typus infra sub var. myriadenia indicatur.
Prickly mesoand microphyllidious vines, potentially high-climbing in trees and forming impenetrable tangles in forest glades but sometimes precociously flowering as diffuse shrubs only 1- 2 m, armed along 5 low ribs of young stems and on ribs ofmost lf-stks and of some pinna-rachises with retrorse aculei to 0.3-1.3(-1.5) mm, the hornotinous stems and all Ifand inflorescenceaxes pilosulous with short, forwardly incurved sordid hairs mixed with minute reddish scales, the foliage bicolored, the lfts dark-olivaceous (when dry brownish) and either glabrous or minutely thinly pubemlent above, beneath paler and either glabrous, or pubemlent along primary nerves, or thinly pilosulous overall, the intervenium nearly always dotted with reddish (rarely pallid or fuscous) scales ±0.1 mm diam. (these rarely wanting, or confined to edge of blade), the inflorescence an effuse efoliate or proximaUy fewlvd panicle of loose amentiform spikelike racemes of small white fragrant fls exserted 1-4 dm from foliage.
Stipules erect subulate 0.8-3.5 x 0.25-0.55 mm, nerveless or faintly 1-nerved, becoming dry and fragile in age.
Leaf-stalks 6-28 cm, the petiole 1.3-4.5 cm, at middle 0.7-1.5 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 5- 17 mm; a sessile, shallowly patelliform elliptic nectary 0.3-0.5 mm tall and 1.3-3.5 mm in long diameter near base of each If-stk and smaller tubshaped or cupular ones below insertion of 1-3 (-5) distal pairs of pinnae, and on pinna-rachises below 1-8 distal pairs of lfts; pinnae of larger lvs 5-33-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 2.5-7(-8) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.6-8 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 8-40-jug., the small first pair 0.2-3 mm from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.6 mm, the middle pairs (further described under each var.) linearoblong or rhombic-oblong from subequilateral or strongly inequilateral base, either acute. rounded and mucronate, or obtuse, the longest ones 3-15 x 0.7-8 mm, the terminal pair dissimilar to the rest, obliquely oblanceolate or obovate, the blades all veinless or almost so above, beneath 1-5-nerved from pulvinule, the venulation becoming more complex with increasing width of blade.
Racemes mostly fasciculate by 2-5 per node of inflorescence, each fascicle subtended by a rudimentary If-stk bearing a patelliform nectary, each raceme without filaments 3 - 4 mm diam. and its pliant axis, including short 2-bracteolate peduncle, 3-7 cm, the narrowly obovoid fl-buds glabrous; bracts membranous lancesubulate 0.2-0.55 mm, becoming brown deciduous; pedicels 0.1-0.45 mm; flowers 5-merous 5-androus, all bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.5-0.7 mm, extemally either glabrous or pubemlent, the deltate-triangular teeth 0.1- 0.3 mm; corolla white (drying fuscous or blackish), turbinate 1.3-1.8 mm, the recurving lobes 0.7-0.9 X 0.5-0.7 mm, 1-nerved; filaments white, free to base, surpassing corolla-lobes by 1.2-2.5 (-3) mm; anthers ovate 0.45-0.55 mm; ovary short-stipitate.
Pods 1-3 per raceme, pliantly pendulous, in profile linear-oblong, when well fertilized (5-)5.5-10 x 1-1.7(-1.9) cm, (8-)9- 12(-14)-seeded, at base abmptly contracted into a stipe (1-) 1.5-4.5 mm, the straight or nearly straight, either glabrous or puberulent, rarely randomly aculeolate replum 0.3-0.5 mm diam., the thinly papery olivaceousor fuscous-brown valves low-bullate over each seed, dotted overall with minute red scales and usually otherwise glabrous but rarely pilosulous overall, when ripe breaking up (sometimes tardily and irregularly) into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 4-8 mm long; seeds transverse at middle of pod, compressed-obovoid, in broad profile 3.7-4.6 x 2.5-3.1 mm, the fawn or castaneous testa smooth sublustrous.
When Bentham first described M. myriadenia (in the genus Entada) and M. punctulata he possessed of each species only one collection and fmits of neither.
It could not then be foreseen that the obvious differences between them in foliage would quickly be blurred by subsequent collections and eventually merge into a continuous range of variations in leaf-formula that is associated with a uniform inflorescence and pod.
The variation in foliage between populations of M. myriadenia follows a familiar pattem of reciprocal adjustment between number of pinnae, size of leaflets, number of leaflets, and distance between successive pairs of leaflets along the pinna-rachis.
In the long series of specimens now available for comparison, the typus of M punctulata, with few pinnae and few broad, distant, dorsally venulose leaflets stands at one end, and those of taxonomically synonymous M. longicaulis and M. myriadenia var. egena, with many pairs of pinnae and very numerous, narrow and crowded leaflets, at the other.
On the upper-middle Amazon in eastem Loreto, Peru and in adjoining Brazil and Colombia plants of these extreme types are sympatric and appear to behave as distinct species.
But outside the region of sympatry they are linked by indefinitely numerous intermediates collectively referred in herbaria to a heterogeneous M. myriadenia.
Five segments of the full arc of variation correspond to the taxonomic varieties recognized herein, but there are no perceptible discontinuities between them.
1.
Key to varieties of M. myriadenia Lfts of longer pinnae 8-26(-30)-jug., narrowly oblong to broadly rhombic-oblong, spaced along rachis at intervals of (1.4-) 1.5-8 mm, the larger ones 5-15(-17) x 1.8-8 mm, 1.8-3.2(-3.4) times as long as wide; margins of successive pairs of lfts either contiguous or discrete, but if contiguous the blades at least 2 mm wide.
2.
Dorsal face of lfts charged overall with scattered red (fuscous, rarely colorless) scales, these exceptionally only few and far between; widespread.
3.
Lf-formula v-viii/8-17; larger lfts (5.5-)6.5-l 5(-l 7) x 2.5-8 mm; n.-w. Amazonas, Brazil; Loreto, Peru; and adj. Ecuador la. var. punctulata (p. 29).
3.
Lf-formula ix-xvi(-xviii)/16-26(-30); larger lfts 5-9.5 x 1.5-3 mm; Amazonian Brazil and the Guianas, n. in Venezuela to middle Orinoco and Maracaibo basins; disjunct in Meta, Santander, and Bolivar, Colombia, and remotely so in Costa Rica lb. var. myriadenia (p. 29).
2.
Dorsal face of lfts lacking scales; lf-formula of var. myriadenia; local in Amazonas, Peru Ic. var. desquamata (p. 29).
Lfts of longer pinnae 24-42-jug., linear-oblong or linear, spaced along rachis at intervals of 0.4-1.4 mm, the larger ones 3-6.5 x 0.6-1.4 mm, 4-6 times as long as wide; margins of successive pairs of lfts either contiguous or imbricate.
4.
Pinnae of larger lvs 11-16-jug. and the longer lf-stks 7-14 cm; discontinuously dispersed in the range of var. myriadenia and w. to interior Ecuador and Pacific Colombia Id. var. dispersa (p. 30).
4.
Pinnae of larger lvs 18-33-jug. and the longer lf-stks 12-28 cm; upper Amazonia, w.-ward from mid-Sohm5es in Amazonas, Brazil le. var. egena (p. 31). la.
Mimosa myriadenia (Bentham) Bentham var. punctulata (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. punctulata Spruce ex Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 408.
1875 & in Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 345, descr. ampliat.
1876.-"Habitat in silvis Capoeiras prope S. Gabriel [da Cachoeira] ad Rio Negro, prov. do Alto Amazonas: Spruce no. 2400."—Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1841; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 13621, E! F! = F Neg. 54857, NY! M. punctulata sensu Ducke, 1949: 55.
Leaf-stalks of longer lvs 6-11 cm, the petiole 2.5-4.5 cm, the longer interpinnal segments 8- 17 mm; pinnae of longer lvs 5-8-jug., the longer pinna-rachises 4-7(-8) cm, the interfoliolar segments (3-)4.5-8 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 8-17- jug., those near mid-rachis rhombic-oblong from strongly inequilateral subtruncate base, at apex broadly rounded or obtuse, apiculate, (5.5-)6.5- 15(-17) X 2.2-8 mm, 1.8-2.5 times as long as wide, the nearly straight diagonal midrib prominulous above, finely pinnate-branched, the inner posterior primary nerve brochidodrome above mid-blade.
In disturbed forest, in forest clearings, in abandoned plantations and on riverbanks above floodlevel, ±80-200 (w.-ward to 450) m, scattered in w. Amazonian Hylaea, in Brazil on rios Uaupes, Solimoes and immediate affluents, in n.-e. Peru on rios Amazonas and Putumayo in Loreto, and in Napo-Pastaza, Ecuador.—Fl.
IX-III. Map 1. lb.
Mimosa myriadenia (Bentham) Bentham var. myriadenia.
M. myriadenia Bentham, 1875, I.e., sens, str., based on Entada myriadenia Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 2: 133.
1840.-"Rio Negro, Schomburgk, n. 917."-Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! Acacia paniculiflora Steudel, Rora 26: 760.
1843.- "[in Innem von Surinam, Hostmann & Kappler] nr.
151."—Holotypus not seen; probable isotypi, numbered 752.
K! MO!—Equated with M myriadenia by Bentham,'1875: 408.
Mimosa myriadenia sensu Bentham, 1876: 344 ("myriadena'"), max. ex parte, exclus.
Spruce 3158 quae = var. dispersa, sequ.; Ducke, 1949: 55.
Leaf-stalks of longer lvs 7-14.5 cm, the petiole 1.3-3 cm, the longer interpinnal segments 6-10(- 12) mm; pinnae of longer lvs 9-16(-18)-jug., the rachis of longer ones 3.5-7 cm, the interfoliolar segments (1.4-)1.5-3.5(-4) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 16-26-jug., those near mid-rachis broadly or narrowly oblong from variably inequilateral base, obliquely mucronulate at apex, the longer ones 5-9.5 x 1.5-3 mm, 1.8-3.2 times as long as wide, (2-)3-4(-5)-nerved dorsally, the inner posterior nerve usually brochidodrome beyond mid-blade, the intervenium usually densely lepidote overall, either glabrous or pilosulous, the scales rarely few and far between.
Climbing into and festooning riparian forest and forming tangled masses in forest openings, in capoeira, in pasture thickets and along roadsides, mostly in lowland, non-inundated forest but attaining 490 m in Guyana, common and locally abundant in the three Guianas, adj. Venezuela, and lower Amazon basin in Amapa and Para, Brazil, in Venezuela w. and n.-w. to the sources of rio Orinoco in T. F. Amazonas and to the Maracaibo basin in Zulia, in Brazil w. to Roraima and along, but scarcely s. of, the Amazon itself to ±66°W; apparently disjunct at 450 m at foot of Cordillera Oriental in Meta, Colombia (Villavicencio; Cord.
Macarena), and in lower Magdalena valley; and remotely so in prov. Heredia and San Jose, Costa Rica.—Fl.
VIII-II, and sporadically throughout the year.—Raspa (Venezuela); hiri-hiri-balli (Guyana).
Map 1.
Ic.
Mimosa myriadenia (Bentham) Bentham var. desquamata Bameby, var. nov., foliomm formula necnon foliolomm numero ac magnitudine cum var. myriadenia consimillima, sed foliolis dorso pilosulis elepidotis patriaque distanti diversa.—Peru.
Loreto: prov. Alto Amazonas, mouth of rio Santiago, s.d.,
G Tessmann ^^2^.—Holotypus, NY.
Leaf-formula essentially of var. myriadenia (±viii-x/18-21) and lfts to 7.5-12 x 2.5-5 mm, but simply pilosulous beneath and lacking reddish scales.
In wet forest near 200 m, known only from the region of Pongo de Manseriche in depto. Amazonas, prov. Bagua and adj. depto. Loreto, [VOL.
65 MAP 1.
Parts of Central and South America.
Range of M myriadenia Bentham. prov. Alto Amazonas, Peru. —FL.
VIII-? Map 1.
Id. Mimosa myriadenia (Bentham) Bentham var. dispersa Bameby, var. nov., foliomm formula foliolommque ambitu inter varietates myriadeniam et egenam interludens, cum ilia pinnamm numero congrua sed foliolis confertis (inter se contiguis vel imbricatis) lineari-oblongis 0.4-1.6 mm tantum latis dorso parce vel obsolete lepidotis diversa.—Venezuela.
T. F. Amazonas: ad flumina Casiquiari, Vasiva et Pacimoni, 1853^, R. Spruce 3183 (2058). — Holotypus, NY; isotypi, C = F Neg. 21882, K. Leaf-Stalks of longer Ivs 7-14 cm, the petiole 0.7-2.2 cm, the longer interpinnal segments 5- 9 mm; pinnae of longer lvs 11-16-jug., the rachis of longer ones 3-6.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.4-1.4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 24-42- jug., linear-oblong acute, to 3.5-6.5 x 0.6-1.4 mm, 4-6 times as long as wide, 1-3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib a little displaced, the posterior nerve(s) short and faint.
In the riparian and forest habitats of var. myriadenia and discontinuously dispersed within its range: interior Surinam (Wilhelmina Mts.) and adj. Para, Brazil (Sa.
Tumucumaque); rio NegroOrinoco divide in Amazonas, Brazil and T. F. Amazonas, Venezuela; Pacific and n. inter-Andean Colombia; near 300 m in sub-Andean Ecuador (Napo) and Pem (Amazonas, Huanuco). — n .
X-III(-V).
Map 1.
The discontinuous known range of var. dispersa, partly within and partly to the west of var. myriadenia, could be explained in two ways, neither ostensibly the more probable.
The variety may be of polyphyletic origin and consist of historically independent but parallel modifications derived from var. myriadenia.
Or alternatively, the dispersed populations represent a primitive stock from which the other varieties of M. myriadenia have issued, var. egena by multiplication of smaller leaflets and vars. myriadenia and punctulata by progressive amplification and loss of number. le.
Mimosa myriadenia (Bentham) Bentham var. egena Macbride, Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 13 (R. Pem), pt.
3(1): 91.
1943.-"[Pem.
Loreto: prov. Maynas] Rio Mazan [18.1.1935], Jose [M.] Schunke 65."—Holotypus, F! = F Neg. 57378; isotypi, GH! NY! US! M. longicaulis Ducke, Bol. Teen.
Inst.
Agron.
N. 2: 7.
1944.-"[Brazil.] Sao Paulo de 01iven9a (Rio Solimoes, in civitate Amazonas) ... secus Igarape Sao Joao, 25.
XI. 1940, Ducke 641.
Esperan^a (ad ostium fluminis Javary)...floriferum31.1.1942, Ducke 889, fructibus maturis 15.
III.1944, Ducke 1519."
Lectotypus, Ducke 641, IAN!; isotypi, MO! NY! US!; syntypi, Ducke 889, MO! NY! RB!,
Ducke 1519.
IAN! MG! NY! M. longicaulis sensu Ducke, 1949: 55.
Leaf-stalks of longer lvs 12-28 cm, the petiole 5-11 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-11 mm; pinnae of longer lvs 18-33-jug., the longer pinna-rachises 2.5-5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 28-40- jug., those near mid-rachis linear-oblong acute, often subfalcate from subequilateral base, 3-6 x 0.7-1.2 mm, 4-5.5 times as long as wide, faintly 3-nerved, the midrib subcentric, the dorsal face with a few scales near margin or almost elepidote.
In riparian forest below 200 m along the Amazon and its immediate tributaries, from the mouth of rio Jandiatuba in w. Amazonas, Brazil upstream through the s.-e. comer of Colombia to Maynas, Pem, there sometimes sympatric with va.
T. punctulata.—Fl.
IX-II(-?).
Map 1.
A(ii).
Series GLANDULIFERA E Bentham Mimosa sect. Mimadenia ser. Glanduliferae Bentham.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Glanduliferae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 393.
1842.- Sp. lectotypica: M. micracantha Bentham = M. rufescens Bentham var. amnis-nigri Barneby.
M. XXXV.
Watsoniae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 146, in clave.
1928, nom. nud. M. ser. GlanduliferaeSQnsu'QtnXha.m, 1875:418,1876: 361.
Armed vines of wet tropical lowland or cordilleran forest and (few) free-standing unarmed shrubs or treelets of brush-savanna, all macrophyllidious, the aculei when present usually small, always scattered and recurved.
Pubescence commonly duplex: of short plain hairs; and of either sessile or stipitate reddish, brownish or pallid scales, stellae or claviform trichomes; but either type (exceptionally both) occasionally wanting, the lfts of M. extensa sometimes dorsally resinous but viscid setulae 0.
Stipules subulate, setiform or lance-ligulate, either caducous or persistent, sometimes obsolete.
Lf-stks charged either at base, or near middle, or less often between or close below first pair of pinnae with a nectary, this either mounded—bottle-shaped and smallpored, or patelliform —cupular and widemouthed; sulcus of If-stk either continuous or bridged between pinna-pairs, but espiculate; lfformula i-x(-xii)/l-ll, the paraphyllidia either subulate and stiflly retrorse or weak obsolescent, the larger distal lfts 1.5-15 x (0.7-) 1-7.5 cm, palmately nerved from pulvinule.
Inflorescence amply paniculate exserted, the branchlets and some fascicles of peduncles commonly subtended by a rudimentary If-stk bearing a relatively large nectary; peduncles (0-) 1-3-bracteolate; capitula without filaments 2.5-5(-6) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, usually globose, but in two spp. characteristically and in one exceptionally short-spicate, the spike and peduncle together not over 3 era;flowers 4-, 5-, exceptionally 6-merous, diplostemonous, whitish, fragrant; calyx sessile or sometimes elevated on a pedicel less than 0.2 mm, campanulate 0.4-1.4 mm, the rim tmncate or obtusely deltate-denticulate; corolla turbinate 1.4-3.5 mm, the lobes either ascending or recurved, 1 -nerved; filaments whitish, either free or (less often) monadelphous around ovary, the anthers in dorsal view narrowly or broadly ovate in outline, the connective broadest below middle, often but not invariably produced beyond the thecae as a minute apiculus, but eglandular.
Pod sessile or shortly stipitate, in profile oblong or broad-linear, piano-compressed, (7-)9-33 mm wide, 5-16-seeded, the smooth or randomly aculeolate replum (0.3-)0.4-0.9 mm diam., the chartaceous valves breaking up into free-falling articles 1-5 times wider than long. Spp. 12, of tropical continental N. and S. America, most frequent and diverse in the Amazon basin, thence extending n. and n.-w. to Pacific n. Colombia, s. Mexico, and the Orinoco basin in Venezuela, and s., e. of the Andes, to Bolivia, to the Brazilian Planalto, and represented by one sp. in Atlantic moist forest of s.- e. Brazil.
The ser. Glanduliferae forms the nucleus, and much of the substance, of sect. Mimadenia, within which it is characterized by ample leaflets, diplostemonous flowers, and broad craspedia recalling those of genus Adenopodia K. Presl.
Almost peculiar to the series are peltate, stelliform or pileiform trichomes, often of rufous color, but these are few or lacking in a few of its members, and occur also in the very closely related but haplostemonous ser. Myriadeniae.
The Glanduliferae fall into two major groups, the larger consisting of prickly vines adapted to forest wet throughout the year, which bear the leaf-nectary at or close to the base of the leafstalk, the smaller of free-standing or opportunistically sarmentose, unarmed or feebly armed shmbs and treelets adapted to seasonally dry habitats in upland eastem Brazil, which have the nectary near or above mid-petiole, sometimes between the first pair of pinnae.
One species of each subgroup has spicate flowers, but small globose capitula are the mle.
In the first group stellate or peltate trichomes are nearly universal (though on occasions few and far between); in the second group such trichomes are abundant in M. lepidophora, but absent in the rest.
Leading characteristics of ser. Glanduliferae are a pyramidally paniculate inflorescence efoliate except for rudimentary leaf-stalks bearing a proportionately immense nectary, and sweetly fragrant, white or cream-white flowers.
The series was based by Bentham on three species, of which M. micracantha (here treated as M. rufescens var. amnis-nigri), the only one of which fmit was known at the time, has been chosen as lectotypical.
Three more species were added by Bentham in Flora brasiliensis, and others have tumed up at intervals since, without materially altering the circumscription of the group, except for the admission of occasionally spicate inflorescence and a few free-standing, not vinelike, treelets.
On account of its spicate flowers, Bentham misplaced M. pithecolobioides in his sect. Habbasia ser. Leptostachyae, where its petiolar nectaries and ovate anthers are obviously discordant.
The Colombian M. lawranceana, very similar in simplified leaf-formula to the vicariant M. colombiana and very closely akin to it, also has spicate flowers, no doubt independently derived.
Conspectus of ser. Glanduliferae Mimosa * Nectary near or at base of petiole (near mid-petiole only in Colombian M. uribeana); some or many peltately or stellately expanded trichomes on hypophyllum of lfts, or on pods (these exceptionally lacking); pods (8-) 10-16-seeded; scrambling shrubs and lianas with nearly always aculeate stems and lf-stks, of wet lowland or cordiUeran forest, from the e. slope of the Andes through Brazilian Amazonia to the Guianas, the Guayana Highland, and n.-w. through Colombia to s. Mexico; 1 in Atlantic s.-e. Brazil.
2. annularis Bentham a. var. odora Bameby b. var. annularis c. var. xinguensis (Ducke) Bameby 3. uribeana Bameby 4. watsonii B. L. Robinson a. var. watsonii b. var. recordii (Britton & Rose) Bameby 5. guanchezii Bameby 6. rufescens Bentham a. rufescens b. amnis-nigri Bameby 7. guilandinae (DeCandolle) Bameby a. var. guilandinae b. var. spruceana (Bentham) Bameby c. var. duckei (Huber) Bameby d. var. extensissima (Ducke) Bameby e. var. cuatrecasasii (Rudd) Bameby f var. paterata Bameby 8. extensa Bentham a. var. extensa b. var. annae Bameby 9. colombiana Britton & Killip 10. lawranceana Britton & Killip ** Nectary near or below mid-petiole; trichomes of the foregoing; pod 9-10-seeded; unarmed free-standing trees and shrubs of caatinga and cerrado in Piaui, Brazil.
11. lepidophora Rizzini *** Nectary above mid-petiole or between first pair of pinnae; some claviform reddish trichomes but these not expanded into scales or stellae; pods 5-8-seeded; free-standing treelets and shrubs of caatinga and cerrado in upland Brazil (Bahia to S. Paulo); stems unarmed, but lf-stks sometimes weakly aculeate.
12. irrigua Bameby 13. pithecolobioides Bentham Key to species of ser. Glanduliferae 1.
Petiolar nectary borne nearly always near base of If-stk, next to or close to If-pulvinus, but in rare Colombian M. uribeana near mid-petiole; pods 8-16-seeded; dispersed, mostly in forest, through Amazon Basin n.-ward to Mexico, and one isolated in lowland Atlantic forest of s.-e. Brazil.
2.
Nectary either tub-shaped, or cupular, or patelliform, wide-mouthed, in profile as wide as or wider than tall.
3.
Fls spicate; known only from Cordillera Oriental near 5°30'N in Colombia 10.
M. lawranceana (p. 51).
3.
Rs capitellate.
4.
Paraphyllidia at base of each pinna setiform (0.7-) 1-2.2 mm; dispersed from s. Mexico (Oaxaca, Veracruz) to Caribbean Honduras, n. Colombia, and s.-w. Venezuela.
5.
Nectary near mid-petiole; paraphyllidia ascending; lfts of distal pinnae 7-9-jug.; Colombia (Santander) 3.
M. uribeana (p. 37).
5.
Nectary at base of petiole; paraphyllidia reflexed; lfts in S. America not over 5-jug. 6.
Of upper Orinoco valley in Amazonas, Venezuela; lfts at once relatively few and small, those of distal pinnae 3-5-jug. and only 1.5-3 cm long, obovate obtuse 5.
M. guanchezii (p. 39).
6.
Of s. Mexico and Central America; lfts when as few as in preceding larger, to 4-11 cm, when as small as in preceding more numerous and rhombic-elliptic 4.
M. watsonii (p. 37).
4.
Paraphyllidia at base of each pinna weak, less than 1 mm, or obsolete; dispersed from Panama far s.-ward.
7.
Capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam. 8.
Stipules linear-ligulate firm 2.5-8 mm, persistent; fl-buds subglobose-pyriform; Magdalena valley in n. Colombia e. to upper Orinoco valley in Venezuela, s. through transAndean Colombia to the Putumayo river 9.
M. colombiana (p. 50).
8.
Stipules subulate 1-3 mm, caducous; fl-buds ellipsoid; Atlantic forest of s.e.
Bahia, Espirito Santo and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 8.
M. extensa (p. 49).
7.
Capitula without filaments 3-3.5 mm diam.; fl-buds slenderly eUipsoid ± twice as long as diam.; Pacific n. Colombia (Choco) and Panama; var. paterata of: 7.
M. guilandinae (p. 43).
2.
Nectary narrow-pored, in profile obesely conical, mounded, or bottle-shaped, the body much wider than the orifice.
9.
Stipules setiform 2.5-11 mm, persistent; paraphyllidia at base of each pinna setiform 1-3 mm.
2.
M. annularis (p. 34).
9.
Stipules minute or obsolete, if present less than 2 mm and caducous; paraphyllidia at base of pinna obsolete or less than 0.4 mm; widespread over Amazonia, the Guianas, and Guayana Highland.
10.
Lf-formula (iii-)iv-vii(-ix)/4-9(-ll) and largest lfts (terminal to furthest pinnae) 1.5-4.5 (-5.5) cm; hypophyllum of lfts lepidote with sessile scales and barbellate along primary nerves 6.
M. rufescens (p. 40).
10.
Lf-formula ii-iii(-iv)/l-4 and largest lfts (3-)3.5-15 cm; if largest lfts less than 5 cm then hypophyllum either pilosulous overall, or glabrous, or the red trichomes stipitate 7.
M. guilandinae (p. 43).
Petiolar nectary borne near mid-petiole or between proximal pair of pinnae; pods 5-10-seeded; freestanding or only incipiently sarmentose shrubs and trees with unarmed stems, of caatinga, cerrado and campo mpestre in e. Brazil (Piaui to S. Paulo).
11.
Hypophyllum of lfts and valves of pod densely stellate-lepidote; lf-formula iii-ix/6-9 and the larger terminal lfts ±15-20 mm; fls at once 4-merous and capitellate, the capitula without filaments ±6 mm diam. and the individual fl 3-3.5 mm long; centr. and s.-centr. Piaui 11.
M. lepidophora (p. 52).
11.
Hypophyllum of lfts and valves of pod lacking dilated trichomes; lf-formula ii-v/2-8 and the larger terminal lfts ±20-55 mm; fls 5-merous but either capitellate or spicate, if capitellate the capitula without filaments only 4-5 mm diam. and the individual fl less than 2 mm; Bahia to S. Paulo.
12.
Fls capitellate, glabrous; some lf-stks aculeolate; n.-centr. Bahia 12.
M. irrigua (p. 53).
12.
Fls spicate, puberulent; no aculei on any part; s.-centr. Bahia to S. Paulo 13.
M. pithecolobioides (p. 54).
2.
Mimosa annularis Spruce ex Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 419.
1875, sens, ampliat.—Typus infra sub var. annulari indicatur.
Prickly, amply macrophyllidious vinelike shrubs, potentially attaining 30 m but often diffusely sarmentose 3-10 m, armed on the usually 5-ribbed stems, on dorsal and lateral ribs of lfstks, and randomly on all axes (except peduncles) of the inflorescence with files of recurved browntipped aculei to 0.5-2 mm, variably pilosulous with spreading or forwardly incurved, sordidyellowish or pallid hairs to 0.15-0.3 mm sometimes mixed with minute reddish scales, the lvs bicolored, the chartaceous sublustrous brownolivaceous lfts paler beneath than above, either glabrous on both faces, or pubemlent overall, or puberulent only on nerves of hypophyllum, but always ciliolate, the pyramidal efoliate or at base few-lvd panicle of small globose capitula exserted 1.5-6 dm from foliage.
Stipules erect, stiffly subulate or setiform 2-9(-ll) x 0.3-0.8 mm, glabrous or almost so, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 3.5- 15 cm, the petiole 2-6 cm, at middle 0.8-1.8 mm diam., the ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs (but spicules 0), the interpinnal segment(s) 1-3.5 cm; an ovoid or flask-shaped, or less often broad-based depressed, small-pored nectary 1-2.6 x 0.8-2.5 mm near base of petiole and similar but smaller ones commonly on Ifstk close below 1-2 furthermost pairs of pinnae, always on pinna-rachises below furthest pair (or sometimes several pairs) of lfts; pinnae 2-7-jug., accrescent upward, the rachis of furthest pair 3.5- 10 cm, the interfoliolar segments mostly 6-25 mm; lfts of distal pair of pinnae 3-11 -jug.,
strongly accrescent distally, the first pair (0.5-) 1.5-7 mm distant from stiffly deflexed subulate-setiform paraphyllidia 0.7-2.8 mm, the blades of lower and middle pairs obliquely rhombic acute, diagonally costate, those of the furthest pair on distal pinnae very obliquely elliptic, ovateor rhombic-elliptic from semicordate base, 15-90 X 9-38 mm, 1.6-2.3 times as long as wide, all at apex either deltately acute or shortly acuminate, mucronulate, the slightly excentric, forwardly curved midrib giving rise on each side to ±5-6 major and several finer intercalary secondary venules brochidodrome well within the subrevolute margin, the 1-3 posterior primary nerves brochidodrome short of mid-blade, the 3-4-nary venulation openly reticulate, the venation either prominulous on both faces of blade or subimmersed on upper one.
Peduncles mostly fasciculate by 2-4(-5), few solitary, each fascicle subtended by mdimentary deflexed If-stk bearing a flask-shaped nectary, the longer individual peduncles at anthesis 4-11 mm, all 2-3-bracteolate; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid fl-buds glabrous or thinly pubemlent at tip; bracts ovate or oblanceolate 0.2-0.9 mm, persistent; flowers whitish, either 4- or 5-merous and diplostemonous, or some 4-merous 10-androus, in some capitula all staminate, in others bisexual distally; calyx campanulate 0.6-0.8 mm, glabrous, the symmetrically or obliquely tmncate rim sometimes vestigially lobulate; corolla turbinate 1.7- 2.3 mm, the erect ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.6-0.9 X 0.4-0.6 mm; filaments white, either free or united at very base into an obscure stemonozone less than 0.3 mm, the longer ones exserted 2—4 mm; anthers 0.3-0.4 mm, the connective commonly produced beyond thecae as a minute point; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, sessile, in profile linear, straight or variably (at times strongly) recurved, 60-100 x ±9 mm, the scarcely indented or shallowly undulate replum 0.7-0.9 mm, either smooth or remotely randomly retro-aculeate, forming a raised rim, the firmly papery brown-olivaceous valves slightly elevated over each seed, either glabrous or minutely reddish-lepidote, when ripe breaking up into transversely oblong or subrectangular, free-falling, individually indehiscent articles (3-)4-8 mm long; seeds obovate-suborbicular in broad profile, ±4.5 x 4 mm, the testa smooth, dull brown.
Mimosa annularis Bentham, M. paniculata Bentham (non aliomm) andM xinguensis Ducke, all endemic to the Amazonian and Guianan Hylaea, are essentially alike except for leaf-formula and reciprocal adjustments between size and number of leaflets, and I here propose to treat them as vicariant races of one species.
So defined, M. annularis differs from sympatric M. rufescens and M. guilandinae in development of persistent setiform stipules and correspondingly stiflf setiform paraphyllidia at base of each pinna-rachis; and further in a pod about 8-10, not 17-33 mm wide.
The closest relative of M. annularis is Mexican and Central American M. watsonii B. L. Robins.,
similar in form of stipules, paraphyllidia and pods, but different in wide-mouthed foliar nectaries.
Bentham, acquainted with only one fmiting collection of M. annularis and one single specimen of M. paniculata, distinguished these species solely by leaf-formula.
This has proved somewhat variable, and there is no longer a gap in the series of pinnaor leaflet-numbers such as might support separation at the specific level.
Mimosa xinguensis carries simplification of the leaf and simultaneous expansion of leaflets a step further than M. annularis, with leaf-formula almost stabilized at two pairs of pinnae and 2-3 pairs of leaflets.
Because a small discontinuity exists between maximum number and maximum size of leaflets in M. annularis and M. xinguensis, as recorded in the varietal key following, the latter appears to stand a little further apart; but the resemblance in all other respects justifies its reduction to varietal status.
Key to varieties of M. annularis Lf-formula (iii-)iv-vii/5-l 1; blade of distal pair of lfts ±1.5-4.5 x 1-2 cm.
2.
Lf-formula v-viL/8-11; distal lfts ±1.5-2.5 cm; known from the Guianas and from Amapa, Brazil.
2a. var. odora (p. 35).
2.
Lf-formula (iii-)iv-v/5-7; distal lfts ±3.5-4.5 cm; n.-w. Amazonian Brazil (Amazonas), s.-e. Colombia and far e. Ecuador 2b. var. annularis (p. 36).
Lf-formula ii/2-3; blade of distal pair of lfts ±4-9 x 2-4 cm; of bicentric range in Amazonia: Maran6nSolimoes basin in n.-e. Peru (Loreto), adj. Colombia and Brazil (w. Amazonas); lower Amazon valley in Para, Brazil and in French Guiana 2c. var. xinguensis (p. 36).
2a. Mimosa annularis Bentham var. odora Barneby, nom. et stat. nov., based on M. paniculata Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 2: 131.
1840 hom. illeg.—"254 .
.
.
British Guiana, Schomburgk."
—Holotypus, numbered 64S, collected in 1837 (fl), K (herb.
Benth.)! = NY Neg. 7567; non M. paniculata Wendland, Bot. beob.
57.
1798; nec West ex Vahl, Eel. amer.
3: 39.
1807; nec Poiret, Encycl. suppl. 1: 74.
1810.- [M. odora Bameby in adnot.,
nom. nud.] 9 O MAP 2.
Parts of Central and South America.
Ranges of M uribeana Bameby, M. annularis Bentham, and M. watsonii B. L. Robinson.
M. paniculata sensu Bentham, 1842: 394, 1875: 419; Kleinhoonte, 1976: 281; Ducke, 1949: 57.
Leaf-formula as given in key to varieties; scalelike or claviform reddish trichomes sparse or almost wanting; lfts relatively small and 2 (-3)-nerved from pulvinule.
Climbing in riparian forest, mostly below 100 m, the large fragrant panicles arising obliquely or pendulous from branch-tips; seldom collected: Guyana (no exact station recorded); Surinam (Marowijn and Courantijn valleys); n.-w. Para (upper Trombetas and Paru valleys), centr. Amapa (middle Amapari and Araguari valleys), Brazil; to be expected in French Guiana.—Fl.
I X - XII. Map 2.
2b. Mimosa annularis Bentham var. annularis.
M. annularis Bentham, 1875, I.e. & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 362, descr. ampliat.
1876.—"Habitat in Brasilia septentrionali.
.
. ad Panure juxta Rio Uaupes: Spruce n. 2893."-Holotypus, K (herb.
Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1866; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 7297! BM! E! M! W! Leaf-formula as given in key to varieties; scalelike reddish trichomes sparse or almost wanting; lfts of medium size, the larger ones 2(- 3)-nerved from pulvinule.
In forest clearings and sarmentose in gallery woodland, ± 150-300 m, known with certainty from upper Uaupes and neighboring Inirida valleys in n. Amazonas, Brazil and adj. Vaupes, Colombia, and extending probably w. into Napo, Ecuador, but known thence only from a sterile specimen.-n. XI-II(-?).
Map 2.
2c. Mimosa annularis Bentham var. xinguensis (Ducke) Bameby, stat. nov. M. xinguensis Ducke, Arch.
Jard.
Bot. Rio de Janeiro 4: 32.
1925.—"Habitat .
.
. ad ripas fluminis Xingu medii prope Altamira [Para, RB] n. 16.818 (foliolis tenuioribus supra glabris subtus costa et margine pilosis) et n. 10.497 (foliolis crassioribus utrinque pilosis), et prope locum Victoria fluminis Xingii affluentis Tucumhy, Herb. Amaz.
Mus. Para n. 16.651 (foliolis crassioribus utrinque pilosis); decembre florens ab A. Ducke lecta."
—Lectoholotypus, RB 16818, RB!; isotypus, ^B = F Neg. 1446; paratypus, RB 16651, RB! Leaf-formula as given in key to varieties; reddish peltate or claviform trichomes either lacking or scattered over hypophyllum of lfts, usually plentiful on ovary and pod-valves; lfts relatively ample and mostly 3-4-nerved from pulvinule.
Climbing into and over trees, especially along riverand lake-shores and in forest clearings, below 250 m, discontinuously, perhaps bicentrically dispersed in the Amazon basin and French Guiana: lower Marafi6n, Caqueta, and upper Solimoes basins in Loreto, Pem, Caqueta and s.-e. Amazonas, Colombia, and w. Amazonas, Brazil; lower Amazon basin, on rio Tucumi and lower rio Xingu near 3°S; and on the Oyapock and Approuague rivers in French Guiana; to be sought in Amapa, Brazil. —Fl.
IX—II.—Pashaquilla (Loreto, Pem).
Map 2.
The material seen from upper and lower Amazon valleys seems indistinguishable.
Most specimens, however, lack fmits, which could possibly yield surprises.
The populations sampled in French Guiana have somewhat more lustrous leaflets than the Amazonian ones, and vary among themselves in density of red scales.
The earliest collection of var. xinguensis known to me was collected in French Guiana by Martin (BM ex hb. Rudge.).
3.
Mimosa uribeana Bameby, sp. nov., adspectu toto M. annularem var. odoram simulans, sed ab ea (distantissime allopatrica) nectario cupulato ad medium petiolum sito necnon legumine duplo latiori (15-17 mm lato) certe diversa, a Glanduliferis colombianis ut videtur remotior, a M. colombiana, M. guilandinae var. paterata et M. lawranceana foliomm formula (foliolis 7-9-jugis usque) simulac nectarii petiolaris situ primo intuitu diversa.—Colombia.
Santander: en quebradas, 1600 m, vallecito a la entrada de la poblacion Guadalupe [6°15'N, 73°30'W], 12.
XII.1949 (fr), L. Uribe Uribe 2070.-Holotypus, COL 47154.
Stout, amply macrophyllidious vines climbing into trees of 3-4 m, armed on ribs of 5-angulate stems, on back of If-axes and on branches of exserted, spiciform or perhaps paniculate inflorescence with sharp deflexed aculei to ± 1 mm, the stems and lf-stks in addition densely minutely pubemlent, the thinly papery lfts bicolored, when dry purplish-brown, glabrous and glossy above, beneath paler dull reddish-brown, ciliolate on major veins and margin and charged overall with remote reddish peltate trichomes.
Stipules not seen.
Leaf-stalks of main cauline lvs 12-14 cm, the petiole ±5 cm, at middle 2-2.5 mm diam., the interpinnal segments ±2 cm, the uppermost lvs (no further described) progressively smaller; nectary a little below mid-petiole, shallowly cupular ±2-3 mm diam. and 1 mm tall, a similar smaller nectary at tip ofthe primary rachis and of each pinna; pinnae 5-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 7-10 cm, the interfoliolar segments 10-13 mm; lfts of distal and penultimate pinnae 7-9-jug., accrescent distally, the first pair ± 3 mm distant from widely ascending, stiffly subulate paraphyllidia ± 1 mm, the broadly rhombic-elliptic distal pair largest of all, the rest rhombic-oblong obtuse, minutely apiculate, the penultimate pair ±3 x 1.5 cm, all 2-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib of distal pair incurved, that of the rest transverse and nearly straight, with ±10 pairs of secondary nervules camptodrome well within the margin, a fine tertiary reticulum prominulous.
Peduncles solitary and geminate, in fmit 7-8 mm; capitula at anthesis scarcely known, without filaments apparently ±4 mm diam.; corolla glabrous, ±2 mm; filaments white, exserted (?) 4 mm.
Pods I per capitulum, broad-linear from narrowly cuneate base, evenly recurved through one-half to twothirds circle, 15-20 x 1.5-1.7 cm, planocompressed, 12-15-seeded, the shallowly undulate, unarmed or minutely remotely aculeolate replum 1-1.3 mm wide, the papery valves finely reticulate, when ripe breaking up into free-falling indehiscent articles 13-16 mm long, the replum and valves alike densely minutely pubemlent overall and microscopically orange-granular.
A vine of wooded ravines at 1600 m, known only from the type-locality at ±6°15'N, 73°30'W in the Cordillera Oriental of the state of Santander, Colombia.—Fr.
XII. Map 2.
4.
Mimosa watsonii B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 36: 473.
1901.-Typus infra sub var. watsonii indicatur.
Coarse, amply foliate, high-climbing vines, the woody tmnk and almost all young stems and Ifstks armed with files of sharply recurved aculei 0.5-2 mm, the hornotinous stems and thin-textured bicolored lfts pubemlent or pilosulous with loose incurved hairs to 0.15-0.3 mm mixed on hypophylla and often elsewhere with transparent or orange peltate scales ±0.1 mm diam., the foliage when dry dark brown or brown-olivaceous above, beneath paler, the inflorescence an ample panicle of small globose capitula exserted 2-5 dm above foliage.
Stipules stiffly incurved, Unear-setiform 2-4.5 X 0.3-0.7 mm, indistinctly 1-nerved.
Leaf-stalks 4-12 cm, charged shortly above pulvinus with a squatly tub-shaped nectary (0.5-)0.7-1.4 mm diam. and either as tall or a little shorter, and sometimes in addition with smaller nectaries on interpinnal segments, the petiole proper (1.5-)2.5-7.5 x 1-1.3 mm, the interpinnal segments 9 ^ 5 mm, the ventral sulcus bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae 2-7-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair (3-)3.5-8.5 cm, sometimes with small nectaries on interfoliolar segments, the longer segments 8-35 mm, the sharply deflexed, subsetiform paraphyllidia 0.7-2.2 mm; lfts 2-9- jug., accrescent distally, the blades in outline elliptic-obovate or obtusely rhombic-elliptic, either obtuse mucronulate or shortly acuminulate, the distal pair 1.5-11 x (0.8-)l-6.5 cm, ±1.5- 2 times as long as wide, all (1-)2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the strong, only slightly excentric, forwardly curved midrib strongly several-pinnate, the anterior and posterior primary nerves much weaker, brochidodrome near or below mid-blade, an open tertiary reticulum weakly developed.
Peduncles fasciculate by 2-6, each fascicle subtended by a mdimentary If-stk with a relatively large tub-shaped nectary, each peduncle 2-3- bracteolate, at anthesis 4-15 mm; capitula without filaments 3.5-5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the plumply obovoid fl-buds thinly lepidote or rarely almost smooth; bracts ovateelliptic, scarcely longer than calyx, tardily deciduous; flowers sessile, mostly 4-, randomly 5-merous, diplostemonous, white and fragrant, sometimes a few lower ones staminate, the rest bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.5-1 mm glabrous, the rim tmncate or obscurely undulate-denticulate; corolla turbinate 1.7-2.7 mm, the erect-spreading lobes 0.8-1.2 x 0.65-0.9 mm; filaments white, very shortly united below the ovary, exserted 4-5.5 mm; anthers ovate in dorsoventral view, 0.4-0.5 mm, subapiculate by the connective.
Pods usually only 1-2 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile broad-linear, straight or gently incurved, 5.5-8.5 x 1-1.2 cm, the shallowly undulate replum ±0.5 mm wide, the papery valves green bmnnescent, discolored and low-colliculate over each seed, densely minutely lepidote overall and finely venulose, breaking up into free-falling articles 5-8 mm long. Mimosa watsonii is the Central American analogue of Amazonian M. annularis.
It resembles M. annularis in sharply deflexed paraphyllidia and in relatively narrow pod, but differs in cupular, not narrow-pored leaf-nectaries and in distantly allopatric dispersal.
Like M. annularis and several related South American species, M. watsonii is subject to great variation in leaf-formula, which Grether (1987: 321) interpreted as random and of no taxonomic significance.
While I agree fully with Grether's reduction of several segregates to a comprehensive M. watsonii, it appears to me useful to recognize the extreme variations in leaffet-size and -number as named varieties; for Grether's criteria, if applied evenhandedly to the related South American complexes of M. guilandinae, M. annularis, or M. myriadenia, would lead to an uncritical and farreaching sequence of reductions in rank.
Key to varieties of M. watsonii 1.
Lf-formula ii-iii/2-4, and the distal pair of lfts (3_)4_11 X 2.5-6.5 cm 4a. var. watsonii (p. 38).
1.
Lf-formula iv-viL/5-9, and the distal pair of lfts ±1.5-3 X 0.8-2 cm. ... 4b. var. recordii (p. 39).
4a. Mimosa watsonii B. L. Robinson var. watsonii.
M. watsonii B. L. Robinson, 1901, I.e., sens, str.—"Collected by the late Dr. Sereno Watson in the eastem portions of Vera Paz and Chiquimula, in 1885, nos.
323 in flower and 185infmit."
—Lectotypus(Grether, 1987: 321), Watson 323, GH!; isotypus, US!; syntypus (185), GH! M. resinifera Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 169.
1928.-"Vicinity of Tela, Atlantida, Honduras, 1928, Standley 54698."
- Holotypus, NY!; isotypus, F! = FNeg.
5^776. -Equated with the preceding by Grether, 1987: 321.
M. wa?5om7 sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 170* Grether, 1987, I.e. M. resinifera sensu Standley & Steyermark 1946: 61.
Leaves as described in key to varieties.
In moist tropical woodland, 10-1250 m, of apparently discontinuous dispersal: s.-centr. and s.-e. Oaxaca and adj. Veracruz, Mexico; Caribbean slope and coastal lowlands of s.-e. Guatemala and n.-w. Honduras.—Fl. (VIII-)IX-I. Map 2.
4b. Mimosa watsonii B. L. Robinson var. recordii (Britton & Rose) Bameby, stat. nov. M. recordii Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 170.
1928.-"British Honduras .
.
.
Middlesex, Stann Creek District, January 19, 1926, Samuel J. i?^cor<i."—Lectoholotypus (Grether, 1987: 321), US!; isotypus, NY! M. rekoana Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 170.
1928.-"Oaxaca, 1917, R. P. Reko 3610."-Holotypus, US!; clastotypus, NY!-Equated with M. recordii by Standley & Steyermark, 1946: 61; with M. watsonii by Grether, 1987: 321.
Different from var. watsonii only in leaf-formula and size of lfts, as described in key to varieties.
In moist oak woodland or mixed forest, within the range of var. watsonii but seemingly largely vicariant, in Belize, on the w. foothills of highland Chiapas and (adj.?) Oaxaca, Mexico, and in s.-centr. Guatemala (Chimaltenango).—Fl.
IXlll.—Haulback (Belize).
Map 2.
5.
Mimosa guanchezii Bameby, sp. nov., hinc M. annulari (subsympatrica) illinc M. watsonii (distantissime in America Centrali allopatrica) affinis, cum utraque pinnamm paraphyllidiis setiformibus refractis congruens, a priori foliorum nectariis doliinec ampuUiformibus cito diagnoscenda, a secunda foliolis simul paucis et minoribus, iis pinnamm distalium 3-5-jugis et 1.5-3 cm usque longis diversa.—Venezuela.
Territorio Federal Amazonas: depto. Atures: cuenca del rio Cataniapo, tramo carretero desde el Aeropuerto de Puerto Ayacucho .
.
. a .
.
.
Las Pavas, 5°40'N, 67°25'W, 19.11.82 (fr), Francisco Gudnchez 75^^.—Holotypus, MO.—Ibid.: 1 km del puente sobre el rio Cataniapo en la via a Gavilan, 6-7 km al SE de Pto. Ayacucho, 13.11.88 (fl), Gudnchez 4850.- Paratypi, MO, NY.
Vines attaining 3(-?) m, armed on subterete stems, on lf-stks and on inflorescence-axes with recurved, shining-brown aculeoli to ±0.5 mm. pilosulous throughout with spreading-incurved hairs to 0.3-0.5 mm and charged on dorsal face of bicolored lfts with scattered sessile, globose, golden or pallid glands ±0.1-0.15 mm diam., the paniculate inflorescence of small globose capitula exserted 2-3 dm from foliage.
Stipules erect-incurved, subulate-setiform 2.5-6 mm, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of lvs below inflorescence 5-8 cm, the petiole ±2.5-3 cm x 0.9-1.2 mm, the interpinnal segments to 11-18 cm; a nectary near base ofpetiole drum-shaped 0.5-0.6 x 0.8- 1.5 mm, its orifice as wide as the pediment, and similar but smaller nectaries below distal Ift-pair of most pinnae; pinnae (2-)3-4-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 4-6 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 9-13 mm; lfts 3-5- jug., much accrescent distally, the first pair 3- 4.5 mm distant from setiform reflexed paraphyllidia 1-1.6 mm, the blades obovate or rhombic-obovate from inequilateral base, obtuse at apex, the terminal pair ±16-30 x 11-21 mm, all essentially 1 -nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric, almost straight midrib 4-7-branched on each side, the secondary nerves strongly brochidodrome well within the margin and giving rise to an open tertiary reticulum, the nervation sharply prominulous on dorsal face, weakly so above.
Peduncles mostly 2(-3) per node of inflorescence, at and after anthesis 5-7 mm; capitula globose, prior to anthesis mdriform 2.5-3 mm diam., the pyriform fl-buds pubemlent and sparsely glandular distally, the receptacle globose or clavate 1-1.5 mm diam.; bracts early dry papery ±0.6 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx membranous campanulate 0.6-0.7 mm, glabrous, the rim subtruncate; corolla whitish ±1.5 mm, the ovate obtuse lobes 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments (not seen fully expanded) white; ovary becoming glandular; ovules ±10.
Pods mostly solitary, in profile retrofalcately linear 45-60 x 7- 8 mm, 8-10-seeded, abmptly contracted at base into a stipe ± 1 mm and at apex into a minute blunt cusp, the shallowly undulate-indented replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, armed along the convex seminiferous suture with a row of reflexed aculeoli less than 0.5 mm, the replum and papery valves alike minutely sparsely pubemlent or in age glabrate, thinly minutely glandular, the valves breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 5-7.5 mm long; seeds plumply discoid ±3-3.3 mm diam., the testa dusky-brown sublustrous.
At forest margins and in roadside bmsh-woodland near 80-150 m, known only from the immediate neighborhood of the type-locality in the valley of rio Cataniapo in depto. Atures, n.-w. comer of T. F. Amazonas, Venezuela, to be expected in adj. state of Bolivar and perhaps across the Orinoco in the Colombian state of Vichad a . - H .
XII-II; fr.
II-? This as yet seldom collected species resembles M. annularis and M. watsonii in the reflexed, setiform paraphyllidia at base of the pinnae, and the first-mentioned more closely in the narrow pod.
It differs from M. annularis in the openmouthed tub-shaped, not ffask-shaped and smallpored petiolar nectaries, which are more like those of the sympatric M. colombiana.
From this it is obviously different in 3-5-, not 1-jugate, much smaller leaffets of distal pinnae.
The remotely allopatric M. watsonii has leaflets either much larger when as few in number (var. watsonii) or more numerous (to 5-9, not 3-5 pairs) when comparable in size (var. recordii).
6.
Mimosa rufescens Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 418.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 362.
1876.—Typus infra sub var. rufescenti indicatur.
Macrophyllidious lianas attaining 12-25(-35) m but precociously fertile and in disturbed habitats flowering first as a diffiise bush or incipiently sarmentose shrub (2-)3 m upward, the tmnk said to be strongly armed but the subterete purplishbrown hornotinous branchlets together with lfstks and axes of ample efoliate panicle either unarmed or commonly thinly armed with scattered recurved aculei less than 1 mm, the young stems with Ifand inflorescence-axes densely minutely mfous-lepidote throughout and commonly also pubemlent or sordid-pilosulous, the lvs conspicuously bicolored, above brown (when dry), either lustrous and glabrous or dull and pubemlent, beneath paler brown, golden-green or olivaceous and minutely reddish-lepidote, proximally pallid-barbellate along primary nerves, the effuse pyramidal panicle of small white globose (exceptionally short-spicate) capitula exserted 1.5-4 dm above foliage.
Stipules subulate 0.5-2 X 0.2-0.45 mm, early deciduous, perhaps sometimes obsolete.
Leaf-stalks (5-)7-19(-23.5) cm, the petiole (2.5-)3-8(-10) cm, at middle 1- 2.4 mm diam., the ventral groove either continuous or bridged between pinnae (but spicules 0), the longer interpinnal segments l-3.5(-4.5) cm; a laterally compressed pyramidal, low-conical or low-mounded, small-pored nectary near base of petiole and similar smaller ones near tip of all lf-stks and of most pinna-rachises; pinnae (3-)4- 10(-l 2)-jug., distally accrescent, the rachis of furthest pair 4-8 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 7-20(-22) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 3-9 (-1 l)-jug., strongly accrescent distally, the first pair 1-7(-11) mm distant from obscure conic paraphyllidia not over 0.3 mm, the blades passing upward from small rhombic to much larger and broadly obliquely rhombic-obovate or almost semi-obovate, at base asymmetrically cuneate, asymmetrically rounded or obliquely subtruncate, broadly obtuse at apex, variable in amplitude according to position on If, those of shade-lvs larger and of thinner texture, the terminal pair (14-)16-45(-55) x (8-)10-35(-42) mm, (1.25-)1.3-1.7(-2) times as long as wide, all 3(-4)-nerved from pulvinule, the slightly displaced, straight or forwardly arched midrib giving rise on each side to 3-5 secondary nerves brochidodrome well within the revolute margin, the inner posterior primary nerve incurved-ascending nearly to or short of mid-blade, the weak outer one narrowly intramarginal, much shorter, the tertiary venulation faint, all nerves immersed on upper face of 1ft, prominulous dorsally.
Peduncles fasciculate by 3-7, the longer ones 4-9 mm, minutely bracteolate; capitula without filaments 3.5-4.5(-5) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the ff-buds usually pubemlent, sometimes glabrous, the receptacle normally ±1.5 mm, exceptionally elongating to 6 mm; bracts ovate 0.35-0.65 mm, persistent;y7ow^r5 mostly 5-, some 4-merous, all diplostemonous, all or almost all bisexual, sweetly fragrant; calyx submembranous campanulate (0.4-)0.5-0.8 mm, pubemlent extemally, the rim minutely deltate-lobulate; corolla turbinate-campanulate 1.4-2 mm, whitish, the ovate or lanceolate, faintly 1-nerved lobes 0.5-0.9 X 0.35-0.45 mm, recurved at anthesis; filaments white or creamy-white, subequilong, the longest 1-2 mm longer than corolla-lobes; anthers (0.2-)0.25-0.3 mm.
Pods l(-2) per capitulum, sessile or abmptly contracted at base into a stipe less than 2 mm, in profile oblong or broad-linear, straight or subdecurved, pianocompressed, when well fertilized (6-)7-l 2(-l 3.5) X (1.7-)1.8-3.3 cm, 10-16-seeded, the crenately indented, pubemlent replum unarmed or rarely (A. Gentry 10709, NY) remotely randomly retroaculeolate and 0.5-0.8 mm diam., forming an elevated rim around the flat papery brownisholivaceous valves, these discolored and raised as a pimple over each seed, minutely red-lepidote overall but otherwise glabrous, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent, narrowly oblong articles 4.5-7(-8) mm long and 3-5 times as wide; seeds transverse at middle of pod, in broad profile elliptic-obovate 5.5-7 x 2.5-3.5 mm, the brownish-olivaceous testa smooth; cotyledons green, between plates of endosperm.
Mimosa rufescens is closely akin to M. guilandinae sens, lat., from which it appears essentially different only, although as a mle decisively, in more numerous and smaller leaffets.
Leaf-formulae as low as iii-iv/4 (from Sa. dos Carajas in Para, e.g., M. F. F. da Silva 1311, NY) or ii-iv/ 4-5 (from Loreto, Pem, Croat 17527, NY) meet or overlap the range observed in M. guilandinae var. spruceana, which is then only mechanically separable by a characteristic pilosity of the leaflets.
It is theoretically arguable that M. rufescens is no more than a variety of M. guilandinae, or even the generalized prototype from which M. guilandinae arose through modification and simplification of the foliage and through progressive elaboration of the peltate trichomes.
The geographic dispersal offers some support for this view, for M. rufescens is dispersed over almost the whole range of the several races of M. guilandinae sens. lat. and might have given rise by parallel evolution to the paucifoliolate mimosas here classified as units within M. guilandinae.
By chance it was the lowest extreme of leafformula that was first discovered and described as M. micracantha, a. variant that has proved to be elusive and highly localized in southwestern Venezuela and adjoining Brazil, and that may represent no more than a brief extension of the curve of variation in leaf-formula manifested by M. rufescens var. rufescens.
Mimosa micracantha (a posterior homonym) is here reduced to a variety amnis-nigri of M. rufescens, but I am very uncertain as to its biological significance.
Observation of whole populations is needed to establish modes of variation in leaf-formula between individual plants at different stages of development and between leaves of single plants produced low and high on the vine.
The ambiguous nature of the type of M. micracantha is apparent from the fact that Bentham associated it not with multifoliolate M. rufescens but with early collections of M. guilandinae var. duckei obtained on the Solimoes and lower Madeira rivers by Poeppig and Riedel.
Key to varieties of M. rufescens 1.
Lf-formula (iii-)iv-x/4-9(-l 1); widespread over Amazon Basin from e. Colombia to Boliva and n.-e. Brazil, thence n. to the Orinoco Basin in Venezuela 6a. var. rufescens (p. 41).
1.
Lf-formula iii/2-3; local on upper rio Negro in Brazil and closely adj. T. F. Amazonas in Venezuela 6b. var. amnis-nigri (p. 42).
6a. Mimosa rufescens Bentham var. rufescens.
M. rufescens Bentham, 1875-1876, 11. cc — "Habitat in Brasilia septentrionali ad Santa Anna prope Para: Burchell n. 9344 .
.
. prope S. Gabriel: Spruce n. 2052; prope S. Carlos ad Rio Negro: Spruce n. 3096.. . ."—Lectotypus, Spruce 3096, K (hb. Benth.)!; isotypi, C! = F Neg. 21881, E! F! = FNeg.
54860, G! NY!RB!; syntypi.
Spruce 2052, Burchell 9344, both K! M. micracantha var. plurijuga Ducke, Notizbl.
Bot. Gart.
Berlin-Dahlem 11: 583.
1932.-"Brasilia: Habitat loco Yucaby super faucem fluminis Curicuriary affluentis Rio Negro ([RB] n. 23246) et prope Sao Gabriel ([RB] n. 23245) "-Lectotypus, Ducke s.n. in RB 23245, 30.11.29 (fl), RB! syntypus, from "Yacuhy, alto Rio Negro," 21.11.29 (fl), RB! M. rufescens sensu Ducke, 1949: 56.
Pinnae of larger lvs and lfts of their distal pinnae nearly always at least 4-jug., either one or the other not less than 4-jug.; terminal lfts ± 1 .
5 - 4.5 cm.
In open primary and disturbed forest, in forest clearings, and becoming colonial in capoeira and on roadsides, on terra firme, mostly between 100 and 500 m but in Bolivia and Sa. dos Carajas in Para attaining 700 and in Cuzco, Peru 900 m, widespread through the Amazon Basin from inter-Andean valleys of s.-e. Colombia (Caqueta, Meta, Vaupes), Ecuador (Pastaza, Santiago-Zamora), Pem (Amazonas, San Martin, Cuzco) and Bolivia (Yungas) e. along the great river and its immediate affluents to n.-e. and s.-e. Para, thence n. through the basin of rio Branco and the Guayana Highland in Venezuela and adj. Guyana to the lower Orinoco valley.—R. almost throughout the year, prolifically \Ul-lll.—Pashaquilla; MAP 3.
Parts of South America.
Ranges of M. rufescens Bentham, M. lepidophora Rizzini, M. irrigua Bameby, and M. pithecolobioides Bentham. lanza-caspi (Pem); unha de cigano (Brazil).
Map 3.
Capitula of var. rufescens normally have a fforal axis about 1-1.5 mm long. In part of I. L. Amaral 1040 (NY) from the Santarem-Cuyaba highway (km 1222) the flowers are spicately arranged on a receptacle to 9 mm long. 6b. Mimosa rufescens Bentham var. amnis-nigri Bameby, nom. et stat. nov. M. micracantha Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 2: 131.
1840, nom. illeg.—"255 . .. Barcellos on the Rio Negro.
Schomburgk."
—Holotypus, numbered 2245 (or perhaps 224S), K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 7^65.—Non M. microcantha (Desvaux) Poiret, Encycl. meth.,
Suppl. 5: 530.
1817, based on Acacia microcantha Desvaux, J. Bot. Agric.
3: 69.
1814.
Pinnae of larger lvs and lfts of distal pinnae at most 3-jug.; distal lfts to 3-6.5 cm.
In habitats of var. rufescens but much rarer, known only from along rio Negro in n. state of Amazonas, Brazil and from the base of C. Neblina in T. F. Amazonas, Venezuela.—Fl.
VII(-?).
Map 3.
Although the epithets micracantha and microcantha cited in the synonymy differ in the connecting vowel, they appear to be of the same derivation and meaning, properly to be treated therefore as homonymous.
7.
Mimosa guilandinae (DeCandolle) Bameby, Brittonia 37: 85.
1985.—Typus infra sub var. guilandinae indicatur.
Diffuse and sarmentose, prickly macrophyllidious shrubs and vines, sometimes flowering at 1 m but potentially attaining 16 m or more, the young stems, some lf-stks and some cauline and inflorescence axes randomly, at times densely and at times remotely armed with recurved aculei 0.2-2 mm, usually either thinly or densely pilosulous with erect-incurved sordid hairs to 0.1- 0.4 mm mixed, on lower face of lfts, or in inflorescence, or throughout, with sessile or stalked, red or brownish stelliform trichomes (but plain hairs or scales exceptionally wanting), the lvs bicolored, the upper face of lfts lustrous brown or purplish-brown and either glabrous or finely (in vertical view imperceptibly) pubemlent overall, beneath paler brown or golden-olivaceous, variably pilosulous, or redto brownish-lepidote, or both, the pyramidally branched, efoliate or proximally few-lvd panicle of small globose, white or greenish-yellow capitula exserted ±2-5 dm from foliage.
Stipules either triangular-subulate and to 2 mm, caducous, or very small, obscure, or obsolete.
Leaf-stalks (5.5-)6-19(-22.5) cm, the petiole including livid, when dry shrunken pulvinus (2.5-)3.5-9(-ll) cm, at middle (1-)1.2-2.7 mm diam., the (sometimes proximally obscure) ventral groove continuous between pinnae, the longer interpinnal segment (1.5-)2-8 cm; nectary near base of If-stk commonly obese verruciform or pyramidal, sometimes laterally compressed, broad-based and narrow-pored 0.7-1.5 x 2-3.5, rarely (var. paterata) patelliform and longer than tall, and similar smaller nectaries near tip of pinna-rachises; pinnae 1-, 2-, 2-3-, 3-, or 2-4-jug., equilong or accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair (0.7-) 1-9.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segment (when present) 1.5-6.5 cm; paraphyllidia either conic and less than 0.3 mm, or commonly obsolete; lfts 1-4-jug., when more than 1-jug. strongly accrescent distally, the blades varying from obovate-suborbicular or asymmetrically ovate obtuse to semiovate-elliptic and either obtuse or short-acuminate, the largest (3-) 3.5-15 X (1.7-)2-7.5cm, ±1.4-2.2timesaslong as wide, all 3-4(-5)-nerved from pulvinule, the variably displaced, usually forwardly curved midrib giving rise on each side to (2-)3-7 major (and often some weaker intercalary) secondary nerves, the inner posterior nerve incurved-ascending beyond mid-blade, the secondary nerves brochidodrome well within the plane or revolute margin, the outer primary nerve(s) short and weak, narrowly intramarginal, the whole venation immersed but discolored on upper face of 1ft, sharply prominulous beneath.
Peduncles fasciculate by 2-7 or few of them solitary, the longer ones 3-10(-12) mm, randomly 1-3-bracteolate, each fascicle subtended either by a stipular bract or by a mdimentary If-stk bearing a greenish nectary; capitula without filaments 2.5-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds green or yellowish, either glabrous or densely pubemlent; bracts membranous, obovate-spatulate or ovate 0.2-0.6 mm, persistent;y/ow^r^ sessile or almost so, white or cream-colored (or reportedly yellowish-green), fragrant, either 4- or 5-merous, diplostemonous, all or almost all bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.4-1 mm, either glabrous or pubemlent extemally, the orifice obscurely deltate-denticulate; corolla turbinate 1.3-2.3(-2.5) mm, the lanceolate acute 1-nerved lobes 0.6-1.3 x 0.3- 0.5 mm, at anthesis spreading-ascending or recurved; filaments white or cream-white, free or less often united into a tube to 1 mm, exserted 1-2.5 mm; anthers ovate 0.25-0.35 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, subsessile or rarely stipitate, in profile oblong, oblong-eUiptic or broad-linear, abmptly contracted at each end, piano-compressed, 7-ll(-17) X 1.8-3.3 cm, 8-16-seeded, the shallowly undulate or almost straight replum 0.4-0.8 mm diam., either smooth or erratically retro-aculeate, the papery lustrous, finally brownish-stramineous valves low-colliculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent, ribbonlike or sometimes oblong articles 5-8(-l 5) mm long and (1-)3-5 times as wide; seeds transverse at middle of each article, compressed-ellipsoid or -obovoid 4.5-5 X 2-3 mm, the testa fuscous-olivaceous dull.
Mimosa guilandinae, in the comprehensive sense adopted herein, comprises five varieties endemic to Amazonia and the Guianas that differ among themselves principally in number, outline and indumentum of leaflets, and a sixth, found in northwestern Colombia and Panama, unlike the rest in patelliform, not mounded and small-pored leaf-nectaries.
Each of the Amazonian varieties was first described as a distinct species, but their supposed diagnostic characters have since tumed out to be independently variable, and discontinuities between them much narrower than could have been foretold.
Number of petals (and consequently of stamens) is uncertain in this species, the flowers of var. guilandinae and var. spruceana being tetramerous, those of var. extensissima almost always pentamerous, and those of var. duckei either one or the other.
Rated by leaf-formula and indumentum, the vars. guilandinae and spruceana appear relatively generalized, the rest exhibiting progressively fewer and larger leaflets combined with these particular, seemingly specialized features: in var. cuatrecasasii dilated and crowded scales on the hypophyllum; in var. duckei stalked scales; in var. extensissima exaggerated asymmetry of leaflets; and in var. paterata the patelliform nectaries already mentioned.
The close relatives of M. guilandinae that occur within or at the edge of its range of dispersal are three: 1) M. annularis, easily recognized by sharply deflexed paraphyllidia at base of each pinna-rachis; 2) M. colombiana, different in ligulate stipules and larger capitula; and 3) the very widely dispersed and common M. rufescens, essentially similar in everything except for more elaborate leaf-formula and prevailingly smaller leaffets, and perhaps the direct progenitor of the species.
The line of reasoning invoked to justify my broad definition of M. guilandinae would seem to lead, granted only slight extension of leaf-formula, to inclusion within M. guilandinae sens. lat. of M. rufescens on equal footing with var. spruceana and var. duckei.
When Ducke described M. micracantha var. plurijuga, which is taxonomically synonymous with M. rufescens, he unwittingly proposed just such an extension, for typical M. micracantha is none other than M. rufescens var. amnis-nigri.
The traditional status of M. rufescens is upheld on evidence of dispersal.
Whereas the varieties of M. guilandinae are vicariant or only marginally overlapping, as would be expected of taxa recently differentiated from a common stock, M. rufescens is sympatric with all of them, its range being nearly coextensive with that of M. guilandinae sens. lat. Key to varieties of M. guilandinae Petiolar nectaries mounded or bottle-shaped, the orifice much narrower than the pediment; lf-formula various; Colombia e.-ward from Magdalena valley to w. Venezuela, widespread in Amazonia and the Guianas.
2.
Blade of lfts thinly lepidote dorsally, otherwise glabrous; lf-formula ii-iii(-iv)/2(-3), the lfts obovate obtuse; fls glabrous; coastal forest in French Guiana and n.-e. Brazil (Amapa) 7a. var. guilandinae (p. 45).
2.
Blade of lfts dorsally at once rufousor fuscous-lepidote and also barbellate-pilosulous at least along primary nerves, sometimes overall; lf-formula and outline of lfts variable; fls in lower Amazonia gray-puberulent or at least scaberulous distally, but glabrous in upper Amazonia and n.-ward.
3.
Lower face of lfts at once lepidote and softly pilosulous overaU; lf-formula (ii-)iii(-iv)/(2-)3^, the lfts ovate or elliptic-ovate obtuse; fls usually densely puberulent, sometimes only distally scaberulous; central Amazon basin in Amazonas, n. Rondonia, and Para, Brazil 7b. var. spruceana (p. 46).
3.
Lower face of lfts lepidote beneath but pilosulous only along nerves; lf-formula i-iii/1-2; lfts either obtuse or acute.
4.
Lower face of lfts and valves of pod lepidote or substellate either with well separated sessile scales ±0.1 mm diam. or with more crowded stelliform scales raised on a stipe 0.1-0.2 mm; widespread in Amazonian Brazil, Surinam and Peru.
5.
Distal lfts of aU pinnae elliptic-obovate obtuse; fls usually densely puberulent, sometimes only distally scaberulous; lf-formula ii/1-2; scales of indumentum stipitate; n.-e. Brazil and Surinam 7c. var. duckei (p. 46).
5.
Distal lfts of afl pinnae falcately half-elliptic or half-ovate-eUiptic and usually shortly acuminate, rarely obtuse; fls glabrous; lf-formula ii-iii/1; scales of indumentum sessile; Amazonian Peru and e. in Brazil to Acre and Para 7d. var. extensissima (p. 47).
4.
Lower face of lfts and valves of pod concealed by a pavement of contiguous and overlapping sessile scales ±0.15-0.2 mm diam.; sub-Andean Colombia, Ecuador and Peru in lat. 2*'N- 9°30'S 7e. var. cuatrecasasii (p. 47).
Petiolar nectaries patelliform, much wider than high; lf-formula ii/1-2; n. Pacific Colombia and Panama.
7f. var. paterata (p. 48).
MAP 4.
Parts of Central and South America.
Ranges of M. colombiana Britton & Killip, M. guilandinae (DeCandolle) Bameby, and M. extensa Bentham.
7a. Mimosa guilandinae (DeCandolle) Bameby var. guilandinae.
Acacia ? guilandinae DeCandolle, Prodr. syst. veg. 2: 465.
1825.-"In Cayenna."
—Holotypus, [Patris ?] 26 in 1784, G-DC! = F Neg. 6995; presumed isotypus, Patris s.n.,
"commun.
L'Heritier et DeCandolle," G\—Mimosa guilandinae Bameby, 1985, I.e., sens. str. Sarmentose, 3-6(-?) m, except for glabrous upper face of lfts and glabrous fls charged nearly throughout with minute sessile or subsessile reddish scales but lacking plain hairs; leaf-stalks 1- 19 cm, the petiole (2.5-)4-10 cm, the interpinnal segments 1.5-5 cm; nectary near base ofpetiole broad-based, small-pored; pinnae commonly 2-, 3-, or 2-3-jug., rarely 2-4-jug., the rachis of furthest pair 2-5 cm, the single or longer interfoliolar segments 15-27(-31) mm; lfts of all but proximal pinnae usually 2-jug., of distal pinnae rarely 3-jug., the blades obovate or reniform-obovate, broadly obtuse, the distal pair 3.5-6.5 x 2-3.8 cm, all 3(-4)-nerved from pulvinule; flowers 5-merous; pods subsessile, in profile oblong 7- 11 X 2.6-3 cm, the valves thinly minute redlepidote, the articles 5-6 mm long and ± 5 times as wide.
In disturbed lowland forest and at forest or creek margins, below 300 m, locally plentiful on and inland from the Atlantic coastal plain in French Guiana and in n.-e. Amapa, Brazil.—Fl. abundantly II-V, intermittently thereafter; fr.
Vonward.
Map 4.
Acacia guilandinae was tentatively referred by Bentham (1876: 363) to the synonymy of Mimosa obovata, which has grossly similar foliage but trimerous flowers and no petiolar nectary.
It was thence transferred, without the qualifying mark of interrogation, to Index Kewensis, where it lay in abeyance until very recently.
The epithet guilandinae is the earliest applied to any member of this group.
The variety is very close to middle-Amazonian var. spruceana, differing principally in suppression of plain hairs.
It was first collected in French Guiana by Aublet (BM!).
7b. Mimosa guilandinae (DeCandolle) Bameby var. spruceana (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. spruceana Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 418.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 362, descr. ampliat.,
t. 90.
1876.- "Habitat in silvis ad Manaos prov. do Alto Amazonas: Spruce n. 1165, Martius."
—Lectotypus, Spruce 1165, labelled: "Barra [do rio Negro], XII. 1850," K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1865; isotypi, without serial number but some annotated in Bentham's hand, F! = F Neg. 54867, M! NY!; syntypus, Martius s.n.,
M! Pithecollobium depauperatum Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France, Mem. 3b: 190.
1906.—"[Brazil.] Cachoeira do Pao dArlho [=dAgoa], Espiritu Santo, [Glaziou] n° 9777."—Authentic material, including a field-label in Glaziou's hand, P!—The locality requires confirmation.
This may be one of Schwacke's collections from Amazonia incorporated, with faulty field-data, in Glaziou's herbarium.
M. spruceana sensu Ducke, 1949: 56; Morim de Lima, 1985, photo 15 (pod).
Early sarmentose and eventually vinelike, recorded at anthesis as 1-6 m tall but perhaps potentially taller, densely pilosulous with erect sordid hairs to 0.2-0.4 mm mixed, in the inflorescence, with stalked stelliform red scales, the lvs on upper face lustrous brown or purplishbrown but finely (in vertical view imperceptibly) puberulent overall, beneath paler brown or golden-olivaceous, at once pilosulous and red-lepidote; leaf-stalks (7-)9-16(-22.5) cm, the petiole (3-)4-8(-l 1) cm, the longer interpinnal segments (2-)2.5-5(-6) cm; nectary at base of If-stk obesely verruciform, sometimes laterally compressed, narrow-pored, 0.7-1.5 x 2-3.5 mm; pinnae commonly exactly 3-, sometimes 3 ^ - , rarely 2-jug., the rachis of furthest pair 3-8 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (1.5-)2-3.3 cm; lfts of distal pinnae (2-)3-4-, commonly exactly 3-jug., the distal pair asymmetrically obovate (3-)3.5-9 X (1.7-)2-4.7cm, 3-4(-5)-nervedfi-om Xi\x\vm\xle;flowers 5-merons; pods sessile, in profile oblong 7-9.5 x 2-3 cm, the valves minutely red-lepidote and erect-pubemlent overall, the articles 4-7.5 mm long and ±2-3 times as wide.
In forest clearings, at margin of disturbed forest, and in capoeira along highways, mostly on terra firme and rooting in either clayey or white sandy soils, but also (Ducke, 1949, I.e.) on lakeand river-banks, ±70-170 m, locally plentiful in middle Amazon basin between 55° and 60°30'W in e. state of Amazonas and adj. Para, Brazil, extending s. in the upper Purus basin (rio Cumquete, affluent of rio Ituxi) to 65°W, 8°S in s.- centr. Amazonas, and along rio Madeira to 9°10'S in n. Terr, de Rondonia.—Fl. almost throughout the year, the ffs and fmits often coetaneous.
Map 4.
The var. spruceana differs from var. guilandinae in pilosulous vesture and less accentuated armament, but this can vary from branch to branch on one plant.
The leaffets of var. guilandinae are commonly fewer by one pair, but this difference is far from exact or constant.
7c. Mimosa guilandinae (DeCandolle) Bameby var. duckei (Huber) Bameby, stat. nov. M. duckei Huber, Bol. Mus. Goeldi Hist. Nat. 5: 381.
1909.—"Hab. in silvis prope Almeirim [Para, Brazil], 9.
IV.03 leg. A. Ducke (3447)."
- Holotypus, MG = F Neg. s.n. + clastotypus (fragm), F!; presumed isotypi, Ducke s.n. in RB 10505, P! = F Neg. 39878, K! S! US! M. micracantha sensu Bentham, 1842: 393, ex parte, quoad specimen Riedelianum a Langsdorffio acceptum; 1875: 361, quoad specimina Riedelianum et Poeppigianum; non M. micracantha Bentham, 1840, sens, str., quae = M. rufescens var. amnis-nigri Barneby M. duckei sensu Ducke, 1949: 56.
Either prickly throughout or some homotinous growth almost unarmed, the stems and lfstks scurfy-tomentulose with red peltiform stellae elevated on a fihform stalk to 0.1-0.2 mm, the dried lfts dark brown and lustrous above, beneath red-lepidote and thinly pilosulous proximally along primary veins; leaf-stalks (5.5-)8- 17.5 cm, the petiole (4-)4.5-9 cm, the one interpinnal segment (2-)2.7-8 cm; pinnae 2-jug., the rachis of first pair 0.7-3 cm, of second pair 2.5-9.5 cm, the one interfoliolar segment 1.3- 6.5 cm; lfts of most distal pinnae exactly 2-jug., the blades broadly obliquely elliptic-ovate 4-12 X 2.3-7.5 cm, very obtuse, 3-nerved from pulvinule;y/ow^rs 4(-5)-merous, the corolla densely gray-pubemlent; pod subsessile, in profile broadlinear or oblong-eUiptic ±7-10.5 x 2.5 cm, the valves red-lepidote overall (the scales ± deciduous in age), the articles 6-7 mm long and ± 3 - 4 times as wide.
Climbing into and over trees of regenerating woodland and along margins of primary forest, mostly below 150 m, scattered along and near the Amazon river downstream from Tefe in Amazonas (±65°W) to lower rios Tapaj6s and Jari in Para, n. on rio Negro to Barcell6s and to centr. Amapa near 1°N; and somewhat isolated on middle Suriname River near 5°N in Surinam.—Fl. ^ll-Yl(-l).—Akamaka (Surinam).
Map 4.
The var. duckei is rather strongly characterized by few, exceptionally ample leaflets, indumentum of distinctly stalked red scales, and graypubemlent flower-buds.
7d. Mimosa guilandinae (DeCandolle) Bameby var. extensissima (Ducke) Bameby, stat. nov. M. extensissima Ducke, Arch.
Jard.
Bot. Rio de Janeiro 3: 75.
1922.—"Habitat in silvis non inundatis prope fluvium Tapajoz medium frequens l[egit] A. Ducke ca. locum Pimental (ad cataractas inferiores [4°35'S]) 5-2-1917 [MG] n. 16.728, prope cataractas Mangabal [5°5'S], 16-12-1919 [RB] 10.476."-Lectotypus,Z)wcA^ in MG 16728, MG! = F Neg. s.n. + clastotypus (fragm), F!; isotypi, G! = F Neg. 28207, RB 10476, RB! US 10409541 = NY Neg. 121831 M. extensissima sensu Macbride, 1943: 89; Ducke, 1949: 56.
Lianas attaining 16 m but some precociously flowering as diffuse or sarmentose shrubs 3 m or less, either prickly throughout or the young stems and lf-stks unarmed, the hornotinous stems and the infforescence to the glabrous ffs densely furfuraceous with sessile or minutely stalked substellate reddish scales often mixed with sordid hairs to 0.1-0.25 mm, the ample lfts when dry dark brown-olivaceous sublustrous and either glabrous or transiently pubemlent above, beneath lepidote and sometimes barbellate along primary nerves; leaf-stalks 6-14 cm, the petiole 3.5-6.5 cm, the 1-2 interpinnal segments 2-5 (-6) cm; nectary near base of If-stk mounded small-pored 0.7-1.2 x 1.5-2.5 mm; pinnae 2- 3-jug., the rachis 7-27 mm; lfts of all pinnae 1-jug., falcately half-ovate or half-ovate-elliptic from broadly semicordate or broadly cuneate base, mostly short-acuminate but occasionally obtuse, the furthest ones 5-13 x 2.5-7.5 cm, all 4(-5)-nerved from pulvinule; capitula loosely 5- 15-fld, the narrowly obovoid fl-buds glabrous; flowers 4-merous; filaments either connate into a tube enclosing the ovary or free almost to base; pod (little known) attaining 9-14 x 2.2-2.7 cm, minutely reddish-lepidote overall, the articles ±8-11 mm long and 2.5-3 times as wide.
Forming tangled thickets in forest clearings and disturbed brush-woodland, sometimes climbing high into trees at forest edge, 80-500 m, perhaps to 800 m in the Huallaga valley in Pem, discontinuously widespread on terra firme in w. and centr. Amazonia: on affluents of rio Maran6n in Pem (deptos.
Amazonas, S. Martin and s.-w. Loreto, lat. 4-10°S), thence e. in Brazil to sources of rios Jurua and Purus in Acre; apparently disjunct on banks of rio Tapaj6s and tributary streams near lat. 5°S in Para.—Fl.
X-III. Map 4.
The var. extensissima differs from var. duckei in leaffets of all pinnae stabilized at one pair, in sessile scales of the indumentum, in glabrous flowers, and usually in more oblique, subfalcately half-ovate outline of the leaflets.
Shape of leaflets is, however, an unreliable criterion, for the anterior margin varies from straight or shallowly concave to shallowly convex, and the apex, although most commonly short-acuminate, may be broadly obtuse (Schunke V. 8308, NY).
Although described from Para, var. extensissima has since been collected only in Pem and far western Brazil, not less than ten degrees of longitude west of the type-locality, but this gap may well be filled by future exploration.
In gross aspect var. extensissima mimics M. extensa of Atlantic southern Brazil, but differs in mounded (not dish-shaped) leaf-nectaries, peltate (not verruciform) trichomes on mostly 4(- 5)-nerved (not 2-3-nerved) hypophyllum, smaller capitula, and slightly shorter filaments.
7e. Mimosa guilandinae (DeCandolle) Bameby var. cuatrecasasii (Rudd) Bameby, stat. nov. M. cuatrecasasii Rudd, Phytologia 33: 236, fig. 1.
1976.-"Type: /.
Cuatrecasas 10544, Colombia, Putumayo, 'selva higrofila del rio Pu- [VOL.
65 tumayo en San Pedro, entre Umbria y Puerto Asis, 300 m alt.,' 10 Nov. 1940 [in young bud, with broken fruits]."
—Holotypus, US 1799170\ = NY Neg. 12182; isotypus, COL!; paratypi, Cuatrecasas & Cowan 27217, COL! US (2 sheets)! Vines 8-12 m, essentially like var. extensissima except for indumentum of sessile rufous scales 0.1-0.2 mm diam. concealing the hypophyllum of lfts and faces of the pod, this sometimes exceptionally broad in context of the whole sp.; leaf-stalks 8-14 cm, the petiole 5-8 cm, the 1 interpinnal segment 2.5-6 cm; petiolar nectary ± 1-1.5 mm in basal diam., small-pored; pinnae 2-jug., the rachis 1-2.7 cm; lfts of all pinnae 1 -jug.,
the blades very obliquely ovate-elliptic or semicordate, either obtusely deltate or shortly triangular-acuminate at apex, those of distal pinnae 7-13 X 4-7.5 cm, all glabrous lustrous above, 4-nerved from pulvinule; flowers of var. extensissima; pod either sessile or contracted basally into a stipe to 6 mm, the body 11-17 x 1.8-3.3 cm, the articles 10-15 mm long, ±2-3 times as wide.
In humid forest, 200-800 m, scattered in intermontane and piedmont valleys of the Andes in lat. 2°N-9°30'S, from upper rio Caqueta in Colombia s. to upper rios Huallaga and Aguaytia in adjoining Huanuco and Loreto, Peru.—Fl.
IXI(-?); fr.
XI-?—Tsejentseg (Kayamas); pashaquilla pardo (in Huanuco).
Map 4.
Rudd compared M. cuatrecasasii with M. colombiana and M. extensissima, which she mistakenly thought to lack scalelike trichomes.
In fact all three taxa have trichomes of the same type, only they are so much larger and more crowded in M. cuatrecasasii as to impart a coppery metallic gloss (reminiscent of Bauhinia cupreonitens Ducke) to the hypophyllum ofthe leaflets.
Except for the size and density of these scales, vars. cuatrecasasii and extensissima are almost identical, showing the same variation in leaffetoutline and having in common all pinnae bifoliolate.
Mimosa colombiana stands well apart from this pair in having strap-shaped stipules, openly cupulate leaf-nectaries, and considerably larger capitula.
7f. Mimosa guilandinae (DeCandolle) Bameby var. paterata Bameby, var. nov., a var. extensissima (Ducke) Bameby, caeterius arete simili, praesertim nectario petiolari patenformi ambitu eUiptico 2-2.5 mm vel cupulato (0.6-) 2-2.5 diam. vix 1 mm alto necnon dispersione geographica semota abstans.-Panama.
Bocas del Toro: 3-6 km w. of Almirante, 30-200 m, 4.
VIII.1976 (fl), T. B. Croat 38200.-"tiolotypus, MO. —Colombia.
Choco: Carretera Panamericana entre rios San Pablo y Pato, 5°30'N, 76°50-56'W, 22.
IV.1979 (fl jun), E. Forero & al. 5577.-Paratypus, MO.
In habit, armament, ample panicle of small glabrous capitula resembling var. extensissima, the dorsal face of lfts lepidote with scattered brownish or reddish scales to ±0.1 mm diam. and thinly pilosulous proximally along primary nerves; leaf-stalks to 10 cm, the petiole (3-)4-6 cm, the one interpinnal segment 2-4 cm; nectary near base of If-stk elliptic patelliform (cupular 0.6-)2-2.5 mm diam., 0.5-1 mm tall; pinnae 2-jug., the rachis 1-4 cm; lfts of proximal pinnapair 1-, of distal pair 1- or 2-jug., when 2-jug. the proximal pair much shorter than the distal, these very obliquely or subdimidiately ovate, at apex either obtuse or depressed-deltate, 6-9 x 3.5-6 cm, 3-4-nerved from pulvinule; capitula without filaments ±3.5 mm diam., the glabrous fl-buds ellipsoid, ± twice as long as diam.; corolla of var. extensissima; pod unknown.
In disturbed woodland and on roadside hedges, ±30-600 m, known only from three localities in n.-w. Panama (Bocas del Toro) and n.-w. Colombia (Choco; Antioquia).-n. IV-VIII, XIIII.
Map 4.
The var. paterata differs from all other varieties of M. guilandinae in its patelliform (not bottle-shaped) leaf-nectaries, but in other respects scarcely differs from var. extensissima, matching this exactly in the small capitula of glabrous flowers, in ellipsoid flower-buds, and in thinly lepidote hypophyllum of leaflets.
The leafnectaries resemble those of M. colombiana, distributed eastward in Colombia from the Magdalena valley into southwestern Venezuela, but this differs substantially in larger capitula, subglobose-pyriform flower-buds, ligulate persistent stipules, and all pinnae precisely bifoliolate.
Mimosa watsonii, endemic to Central America northward into southern Mexico, also has patelliform nectaries, but differs in more numerous leaflets and in particular in the pair of conspicuous deflexed paraphyllidia at base of each pair of pinnae.
The syntypes of var. paterata, from Bocas del Toro and Choc6 respectively, appear essentially alike in nectaries and flower-buds.
The unicate specimen from northem Antioquia (Segovia, C. Sandeman 5568, annotated by Sandwith as "sp. nov. ?,
near M. lawranceana,'' K) differs in smaller, cupular rather than dilated patelliform nectary and somewhat plumper, but similarly glabrous flower-buds.
Definitive identification of these forms must be deferred until the fmits become known.
Mimosa lawranceana, very closely resembling Sandeman's plant in foliage but found at rather greater elevation in the Eastem Cordillera, is for the present readily distinguished by spicate partial inflorescences.
8.
Mimosa extensa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 393.
1842.—Typus infra sub. var. extensa indicatur.
Clambering shrubs of unknown stature, the brown striate hornotinous stems and many lfstks armed, commonly densely so, with vertical files of sharp recurved aculei 0.5-2.5 mm (these lacking on occasional branchlets), the stems distally and axes of amply paniculate, proximally leaf-bracteate but always distally exserted inflorescence pilosulous with erect-spreading pallid hairs (±0.2-0.3 mm, mixed with (deciduous) minute pallid, brown or reddish peltate trichomes, the broad paucifoliate thin-textured lvs bicolored, when dry lustrously brown-olivaceous and glabrous above, beneath dull and paler, at least thinly lepidote and sometimes resinousspotted, often barbellate in axils of primary nerves.
Stipules subulate 1.5-3 x 0.3-0.5 mm, caducous.
Leaf-stalks slender subterete (3-)4-l 1 cm, the petiole (1.5-)3-7 cm, at middle 0.5-1.4 mm diam., near pulvinus with a depressed subcircular concave nectary ±0.4-0.5 mm tall and 1-1.3 mm diam., the interpinnal segments (of var. extensa) 1-3.5 cm; pinnae 1-3-jug., when more than 1-jug. accrescent distally, the rachis (5-) 10-50 mm, charged ventrally near apex with a nectary like that of petiole but smaller; paraphyllidia 0; lfts 1-jug., the broad livid pulvinule 1-2 mm, the blade semi-cordate or falcately semiovate (2.5-)3-6 X (1-) 1.5-3 cm, in shade-lvs of var. extensa and even uppermost lvs of var. annae to 10 X 5 cm, all at base broadly rounded on proximal side and cuneate on distal one, at apex contracted into a short triangular-acuminate or deltate, finally obtuse acumen, coarsely 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the incurved primary nerves freely pinnate-branched, the secondary venules brochidodrome well within the plane margin, these and 3-4-nary venulation sharply raised on both faces of blade.
Peduncles fasciculate by 2-8, 2.5-11 mm; capitula ± 1 0 - 25-fld, without filaments ±5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the glabrous fl-buds in profile elliptic-oblanceolate obtuse; bracts lanceor linear-elliptic 0.35-0.8 mm; flowers white, 4-5- merous diplostemonous; calyx campanulate 0.6- 1 mm, contracted at base into a livid pedicel 0.1- 0.5 mm, the rim undulate tmncate; corolla white 2.6-3 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 1-1.5 x 0.6- 0.8 mm, spreading or recurved at full anthesis; filaments white, free to base, the longer set exserted (3-)3.5-5 mm; ovary glabrous.
Pods (few seen) broad-linear piano-compressed, attaining ±8-11 x 2-2.2 cm, essentially like that of M. guilandinae, the replum undulate.
Mimosa extensa is readily recognized in its region by prickly stems, leaves composed of one to three amply bifoliolate pinnae, obliquely dilated half-cordate leaflets minutely lepidote beneath, and concave nectaries at base of petiole and immediately below each pair of leaflets.
It is an outlier of the Amazonian group exemplified by M. guilandinae.
All but two of several collections of M. extensa known to me are essentially uniform in leaf-formula and pubescence, but Brade 19295 from base of Fumo Grande in southern Espirito Santo and Burchell 2699 from Mage (near the north shore of Guanabara Bay) are so anomalous that I feel compelled to describe them as a taxonomic variety.
Key to varieties of M. extensa 1.
Pinnae 2-3-jug.; margin of lfts plane; blade of lfts barbate dorsally in axils of primary veins; range of the species, s.e.
Bahia to Rio de Janeiro.
8a. var. extensa (p. 49).
1.
Pinnae exactly 1 -jug.; lfts glabrous dorsally; margin of lfts revolute; foothills of Sa. do Castelo in s. Espirito Santo, vicinity of Mage in Rio de Janeiro 8b. var. annae (p. 50).
8a. Mimosa extensa Bentham var. extensa.
M. extensa Bentham, 1842, I.e.—"Brazil, Sello, a. single specimen."
—Holotypus, Sello 151, K (hb. Hook.)!; presumed isotypus, Sello 2250 from Mage, +B = F Neg. 1318\ Leaf-stalks (3-)4.5-ll cm, the petiole (1.5-) 3-6.5 cm, the 1-2 interpinnal segments (1-) 1.5-3.5(-5) cm; rachis of pinnae (5-) 10-32 mm; lfts of lvs close below inflorescence (2.5-)3-6 x (1-)1.5-3 cm, of shade-lvs to 10 x 5 cm; otherwise as given in key to varieties.
Sarmentose at edge of humid Atlantic forest along and near the coast, between 17° and 23°S in s.e.
Bahia (Mte.
Pascoal), Espirito Santo and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.—Fl IX-II(-?).
Map 4.
A record from Ouro Preto, Minas Gerais (Schwacke 10394, RB) requires confirmation.
8b. Mimosa extensa Bentham var. annae Barneby, var. nov., a var. extensa pinnis exacte l(nec 2-3)-jugis, foliolisque margine revolutis (nec planis) diversa.—Brazil.
Rio de Janeiro: Frechal to Mage, 25.11.1826 (fl), W. T. Burchell 2699.-Holotypus, K (2 sheets) = NY Neg. 1862, 11635; isotypus, P. M. extensa sensu Bentham, 1876: 361, ex parte, quoad Burchell 2699, but its characters not incorporated in the description.
Leaf-stalks 4-11 cm; rachis of pinnae 2-3 cm; lfts of lvs close below inflorescence 6-10 x 4- 6.5 cm; otherwise as given in key to varieties.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be expected in gallery forest along streams of the coastal plain, known only from the type-locality near 22°40S, 43°W in state of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and perhaps associated with var. extensa, and from Furno Grande in s. Espirito Santo.—Fl.
II-III(-?).
Map 4.
Differences in leaf-formula between var. extensa and var. annae are of the same order as those taken to distinguish taxa of the same group in Amazonia.
In the state of Rio var. extensa is known by modem collections chiefly from the Organ Mts., whereas the type-locality of var. annae is on the plain between the Organs and Guanabara Bay.
It is troubling, however, that var. extensa may also have occurred at or near Mage, if the label of Sellow 2250 (cf. synonymy of var. extensa) formerly at Berlin is to be believed.
Obviously new collections and field-studies of the species are highly desirable.
The variety is named in memory of Anna Burchell, who, following her brother's suicide in 1835, presented his invaluable herbarium to Sir William Hooker.
9.
Mimosa colombiana Britton & Killip, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 35: 153.
1936, a substitute for M. bauhiniaefolia Karsten, Fl.
Columb.
2: 65, pi. 133.
1863, nom. illeg.; non Af. bauhiniaefolia Salisbury, 1796. —"Habitat sepes et fruticeta planitiemm calidamm ad litora fluminis Metae, prope Villavicencio, altitudine 450 m .
.
. ."—Holotypus, Karsten s.n.,
W!; isotypi, F! NY! M. bauhiniaefolia sensu Bentham, 1875: 418.
Robust macrophyllidious vines of unknown potential length, armed on older stems and sometimes on lf-stks with scattered retrorse aculei to 1.5-7 mm, either glabrous except for thinly pilosulous inflorescence or the hornotinous stems, lf-stks and (rarely) the dorsal face of ample thintextured bicolored lfts pilosulous with erect sordid hairs to 0.2-0.3 mm, the lfts in addition microscopically reddishor brown-lepidote dorsally (the scales sometimes deciduous or almost lacking), the openly branched efoliate, lateral or terminal panicles of small globose capitula exserted 2-6 dm from foliage.
Stipules firm erect, linear, lanceolate or lance-elliptic 2.5-8 x 0.8- 1.5 mm, indistinctly several-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (5.5-)7-16 cm, the petiole (3-)4-8 cm, at middle 1.5-2.5 mm diam., the one interpinnal segment (3-)4-8 cm; a sessile patelliform nectary 3-5.5 x 1.5-2.5 mm at base ofpetiole and similar smaller ones at tip of each pinnarachis; pinnae 2-jug., the rachis of proximal pair 1.8-3 cm, of distal pair 2.3-4.5 cm; paraphyllidia either subulate 0.5-1 mm or suppressed; lfts of all pinnae 1-jug., those of distal pinnae a little longer, the blades amply asymmetrically ovateelliptic from deeply broadly semicordate base, broadly rounded at apex, 4.5-12.5(-l 3) x 3-7.5 cm, 1.3-1.75 times as long as wide, all coarsely 4-nerved from pulvinule, the displaced midrib and 2 primary nerves on posterior side incurvedascending and giving rise to ±2-7 major (with indefinite minor) secondary ones brochidodrome within the narrow plane or subrevolute membranous margin, a mesh of tertiary connecting and reticular venules prominulous beneath.
Peduncles mostly fasciculate by 2-7, rarely solitary, 3-11 mm, bibracteolate near or beyond middle; each fascicle subtended by a mdimentary If-stk with a patelliform nectary; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, thefl-budsglabrous; bracts ovate or spatulate 0.5-0.9 mm, persistent; y/ow^r^ 5(- 6)-merous diplostemonous, all bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate glabrous 0.5-0.8 mm, the rim obscurely deltate-denticulate; corolla whitish turbinate 1.7-2.8 mm, the ovate acute lobes 0.6-1 mm, at full anthesis erect-patent; filaments white, monadelphous through 0.5-1.6 mm, the longer set exserted 2.5-3 mm; anthers 0.35-0.4 mm; ovary commonly glabrous, rarely puberulent.
Pods mostly solitary, stipitate, the stipe 3-6 mm, the body broad-linear piano-compressed, straight or almost so, 7-13 x 1.5-2.7 cm, 10-12(-13)-seeded, the straight replum 0.3- 0.5 mm diam., the papery, dull brown, minutely pallid-dotted (but not lepidote) glabrous valves slightly elevated and discolored over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, transversely oblong articles 7-8 mm long; seeds transverse at middle of pod, in broad outline obovate ±5.5 X 3.5 mm, the dark brown testa smooth sublustrous.
Sarmentose in gallery forest, in disturbed brushwoodland and in hedges, local in scattered stations in e. Colombia and adj. Venezuela: at 100- 900 m in valley of rio Magdalena in prov. Santander (and presumably on left bank in Antioquia); at 250-450 m on upper rio Meta in prov. Meta and Cundinamarca; at 225 m on rio Putumayo near 75°W in prov. Putumayo; and at 60-90 m near mouth of rio Meta in prov. Vichada; entering Venezuela near confluence of rios Meta and Orinoco in T. F. Amazonas and Apure, and at 800 m in valley of rio Quinimari in Tachira.—Fl.
X-ll.—Zarza parilla (Meta).
Map 4.
Specific characters of M. colombiana are bladelike stipules, broad sessile patelliform leafnectaries, and glabrous flowers with ascending corolla-lobes.
Lepidote indumentum is always relatively sparse, more often brown rather than red, and sometimes almost lacking.
Union of the filaments varies from a short collar below the ovary to a tube surrounding it.
The leaflets of Davidse 13931 from S. Carlos del Meta are pilosulous beneath, unlike those of other collections, including one (Piedra Marimare, Wurdack & Monachino 40906, ISTY) from close by on the Orinoco.
10.
Mimosa lawranceana Britton & Killip, Phytologia 1: 23.
1933.—"Type, [A. E.] Lawrance 600, collected November 26, 1932, at an altitude of about 1250 m, in the El Umbo [Mt. Chapon] region of [extreme] western Boyaca, Colombia."
-Holotypus, NY!; isotypi, BM! F! = F Neg. 54845, GH (2 sheets)! M. Lawranceana sensu Britton & Killip, 1936: 153.
Prickly macrophyllidious vines 4-5 m long, armed on old stems (not seen), on dorsal rib of If-axes, and on obtusely 5-angulate major axes of paniculate efoliate inflorescence with retrorse aculei to 1(-?) mm, the If-axes, veins of hypophyllum, Ift-margin and inflorescence at once finely pubemlent and minutely lepidote with pallid or reddish scales, the lvs strongly bicolored, when dry dark brown and delicately pallid-reticulate on upper face, beneath dull rustybrown, the inflorescence of short narrow spiciform racemes of white fls exserted at least 2 dm from foliage.
Stipules (one seen) erect firm subulate ±2 X 0.6 mm, apparently deciduous.
Leafstalks ±5-7.5(-?) cm, the petiole to 5.5 cm, at middle 1.5 mm diam., the one interpinnal segment 1.5-2 cm; an obese hemispherical widemouthed nectary ±2 mm diam. at base of If-stk and similar small ones below apex of each pinna; pinnae 2-jug., the distal pair larger, the rachis of first pair 1.5-2 cm, of distal pair 2.5-4 cm, the one interfoliolar segment ±1.7-2 cm; paraphyllidia reduced to a minute process; lfts of all pinnae 2-jug., the first pair ovate obtuse 1-2 cm, the distal pair asymmetrically ovate from deeply broadly semicordate base 6.5-8.5 x 4-5 cm, 1.6- 1.7 times as long as wide, shortly obtusely acuminate at apex, 4-nerved from pulvinule, the strongly displaced midrib curved forward and giving rise on each side to ±4 major secondary nerves, the inner posterior nerve incurved-ascending ± to mid-blade, the outer ones short and weak, the outermost secondary venules brochidodrome shortly within the margin.
Peduncles either solitary, or geminate, or paired with a branchlet, some simply bracteate at base, others subtended by a mdimentary If-stk bearing a cupular nectary, some minutely bracteolate but others not; spikes without filaments 3-3.5 mm diam., the floral axis becoming 8-13 mm, the obtuse fl-buds glabrous; bracts membranous oblanceolate 0.3-0.4 mm, persistent; flowers creamwhite 4-merous 8-androus, all bisexual; calyx elevated on a livid pedicel 0.1 mm, membranous campanulate 0.4-0.5 mm, the rim subtmncate; corolla turbinate 1.6-1.7 mm, the ovate acute 1-nerved lobes ascending at anthesis, 1-1.2 x 0.6-0.7 mm; filaments cream-white, free to base, exserted ± 2 .
5 mm; ovary glabrous; pod unknown.
Climbing into trees on steep forested ridges, known only from the type-locality at ± 1250 m on the w. slope of Cordillera Oriental near 5°30'N in w. Boyaca, Colombia.—Fl.
Xl-Xll.—Iguana.
A strikingly distinct species, related to M. colombiana but differing in leaf-formula and in spiciform disposition of the flowers.
In the one known collection the flowers are tetramerous, whereas those of M. colombiana are pentamerous, but this may not be a constant difference.
11.
Mimosa lepidophora Rizzini, Rodriguesia 41: 170.
1976.—".
.
. in cerrado ad Itaveira (Piaui), F. B. Ramalho 313 (11.
XII. 1973);.
.
. in caatinga ad Sao Joao do Piaui, a D. P. Lima 13.245 (2.
X.1973) lecta."
-Lectotypus, Ramalho 313, RB 1906301; syntypus, Lima 13245, not seen.
Unarmed, free-standing arborescent shrubs attaining 5 m, the annotinous stems brown, densely lenticellate, the hornotinous branchlets and foliage, except for glabrous or glabrescent upper face of lfts, finely white-pilosulous with simple hairs ±0.1-0.35 mm mixed with few or many, pallid or rufous, short-stalked stelliform trichomes ±0.1 mm diam., the ample lvs bicolored, the lfts dark green above, beneath paler and barbellate along principal nerves, the inflorescence an ample panicle of pseudoracemose globose capitula exserted 1 dm and more from foliage.
Stipules subulate 0.5-1 mm, caducous or subpersistent.
Leaf-stalks 2.5-6 cm, the petiole ±1.2-2.5 cm, the longer interpinnal segments 10-16 mm; an obese mounded, rather widemouthed nectary at base 0.7-1.6 mm diam. near or below mid-petiole, and smaller tub-shaped ones on pinna-rachises close below 1-2 distal pairs of pinnae; pinnae 2-9-jug., strongly accrescent distally, the rachis of distal pair 4-8 cm, the interfoliolar segments to 7-11 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (5)6-9-jug., strongly accrescent distally, the small first pair 2-5 mm distant from weak erect subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.3 mm, the blades obliquely rhombic-ovate and the distal pair rhombic-obovate, all broadly obtuse, on anterior side dilated below middle and the margin there subparallel to rachis, the longer blades 15-21 X 7-13 mm, all strongly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the forwardly displaced midrib 3-4- branched on each side and the branches brochidodrome well within the revolute margin, the posterior primary nerve narrowly intramarginal, produced well beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles fasciculate by 2-4, 3-9 mm, ebracteolate, each fascicle subtended by a mdimentary If-stk with an obese cupular nectary; capitula without filaments 6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid-ellipsoid fl-buds gray-pilosulous; bracts spatulate-oblanceolate 0.6-0.9 mm, early brunnescent and deciduous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some at base of capitulum staminate; calyx turbinate-campanulate, sometimes dilated above middle, 0.8-1.4 x 0.8-1 mm, the tube submembranous below the sinuses between teeth, these broader than long, very obtuse; corolla whitish, narrowly vase-shaped 2.9-3.5 mm, the lance-ovate acute 1-nerved lobes 1-1.3 x 0.9 mm, pilosulous extemally; filaments united at very base into a stemonozone 0.5 mm or less, exserted 2-4.5 mm; ovary sessile glabrous.
Pods I per capitulum, stipitate, the stipe 3.5-6 mm, the body broad-linear planocompressed, straight or almost so, abmptly contracted at both ends, ±45-85 X 12-14 mm, 8-10-seeded, the slightly indented replum 0.6-0.7 mm diam., the papery valves brownish, obscurely umbonulate immediately over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely minutely furfuraceous-lepidote overall, the ripe valves breaking up into individually indehiscent articles 5-10 mm long; seeds transverse, discoid, in broad view ± 8 x 7 mm, scarcely 1 mm thick, the testa smooth castaneous dull.
In cerrado and caatinga thickets, ±250-550 m, apparently localized in s.-centr. Piaui (Itaueira; S. Joao do Piaui; S. Raimundo Nonato; Caracol), to be sought in adj. transfranciscan Bahia.—Fl.
X-l.—Angelim.
Map 3.
Mimosa lepidophora was likened in the protologue to M. annularis, but appears to me much closer to M. rufescens, being very like this in leafformula and indumentum, but different in loss of prickles, no doubt related to its free-standing, not vinelike life-form, in position of the petiolar FIG. 1.
Mimosa irrigua Bameby: A. Leaf, with enlarged nectaries inset.
B. Inflorescence, with bracteiform leaf enlarged.
C. Leaflet, dorsal view.
D. Bract + flower. (AU from Irwin 31194.) nectary well above base of leaf-stalk, in larger flowers, and in relatively narrow pod (about 12- 14, not 17-33 mm wide).
From the two other Glanduliferae adapted to yearly periods of drought in cerrado and caatinga climax associations it is more readily distinguished by more numerous and smaller leaflets densely lepidote beneath, in bearing the nectary near mid-petiole and not close to or between the first pair of leaflets, and in larger, tetramerous (not pentamerous) flowers.
The species links the elepidote freestanding, almost or quite unarmed Glanduliferae of the Brazilian Planalto to the lepidote-stellate and prickly lianas of the hylaean forest.
12.
Mimosa irrigua Bameby, Brittonia 37: 126, fig. 1.
1985.-"Brazil.
Bahia: Sa. da Agua da Rega ±29 km N of Seabra on road to Agua da Rega, ±1000 m, 27 Feb 1971 (fl), Irwin (with Harley and G. L. Smith) 31194.''- Holotypus, UB!; isotypi, G! K! LE! NY! P! R! US! Fig.
1.
Amply macrophyllidious shrub with smooth arching red-brown stems to 3-4 m, either unarmed or erratically armed on dorsal rib of lfstks or on midrib of lfts with few remote recurved aculei less than 1 mm, either glabrous except for minutely pubemlent stipules and pulvini below the partly axillary but later well exserted, pyramidally paniculate inflorescence of small globose white capitula or villous throughout except for ventrally glabrous lfts, the foliage bicolored, the broad plane-margined lfts dull brown-olivaceous above, paler olivaceous beneath; no peltate trichomes, but scattered minute thickened reddish ones on inflorescence-axes.
Stipules erect, subulate, linear-attenuate or subsetiform 2-6(-7) X 0.4-0.6 mm, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks (2.5-)4-8.5 cm, the petiole (5-)15-30 mm, near middle 1.5-2 mm diam., either near or well above middle with an elliptic or subcircular depressedurceolate nectary 2-3 mm in long diam., the ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs and sometimes surmounted by a smaller substipitate nectary; pinnae 2-3-jug., the distal or penultimate pair longest, their axis 4-8 cm, often between 1-2 Ift-pairs with a small nectary, the interfoliolar segments to 10-23 mm; lfts of proximal pinnae 2-3-jug., of distal ones 3-5-jug., decrescent proximally, in outline broadly obliquely obovate or elliptic-obovate from inequilaterally cordate base, mucronate at obtuse or deltate apex, the larger blades 25-57 x 20-34 mm, mostly 3- 5(-6)-nerved from stout short wrinkled pulvinule, the straight or slightly incurved midrib giving rise on each side to 2-3 major secondary venules brochidodrome well within the margin, these and the finer 3-4-nary reticular venules prominulous on both faces of 1ft.
Peduncles fasciculate by 2-5, 3-10 mm, each fascicle subtended by a mdimentary If-stk charged with a scutellate nectary; capitula without filaments 4- 5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts earlydrybrown, cuneate-spatulate ±0.7 x 0.25- 0.4 mm; fls 5-merous 10-androus glabrous, many staminate; calyx campanulate brownish 0.4-1.2 mm, the deltate lobes 0.15-0.3 mm; corolla whitish 1.6-1.8 mm, the erect, narrowly ovate, weakly 1-nerved lobes 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments whitish yellowing in age, shortly united at very base below the ovary, exserted 1-2.5 mm; anthers ovate 0.35-0.4 mm, apiculate by the connective; ovary subsessile, densely pilosulous and at times charged with a few glandular granules, becoming velutinous after fertilization but later glabrate.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 8A) sessile, piano-compressed, in profile oblong, crescentically decurved, 50-60 X 14-16 mm, abmptly contracted at each end, the undulately constricted replum ±0.8 mm diam., either smooth or incipiently remotely aculeolate, the papery valves becoming venulose, when ripe breaking up into 6-8 broad panel-like articles ±10 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In capoeira of the cerrado-caatinga transition zone, sometimes about rock outcrops, ±700- 1000 m, local on the n. Chapada Diamantina in lat. 9°50'-12°20'S, upland n.-centr. Bahia (mun. Sento Se; Sa. do A^uma; Sa. do Tombador; Sa. da Agua da Rega), Brazil.—Fl.
I-III. Map 3.
Because it is the only representative of its group occurring in upland northem Bahia, M. irrigua should be recognized without difliculty, the petiolar nectaries, small heads of white diplostemonous flowers, and broad piano-compressed pod combined with few ample leaflets being characteristic.
For appraisal of affinity see conspectus of ser. Glanduliferae above.
The four known populations of Af. irrigua differ in minor points.
At Sento Se, on Sa. do Tombador, and on Sa. da Agua da Rega the petiole proper is well developed, mostly 15-30 mm long, and the stipules are setiform; while on Sa. do Acurua the petiole is almost suppressed and the stipules are shortly subulate.
Both at Sento Se and on Sa. do Agurua the leaffets vary from glabrous to densely pilosulous on the lower face, while further south the leaffets, so far as known at present, are consistently glabrous on both faces.
Hatschbach 39566 (NY) from west of Morro do Chapeu has elliptic rather than broadly ovate leaflets.
13.
Mimosa pithecolobioides Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 413.
1875 & //i Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 357, descr. ampliat.
1876.- "... in Taboleira camporum provinciae Minas Geraes australioribus et prope Mariana: Martius."
—Holotypus, collected III or early IV. 1818, M (2 sheets, one = F Neg. 6194, one = NY Neg. 11549)\—Pithecolobium lasiogynum Martius ex Bentham, I.e., pro syn. M. lasiophylla Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 414.
1875 & in Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 357, descr. ampliat.
1876.—".. . in campis deserti provinciae Minas Geraes, praesertim in Serro Frio: Martius."
— Holotypus, collected VIII. 1818 (fl), M (2 sheets)! = F Neg. 6188 (lapsu sub nomine "M leucophylla").
M. pithecolobioides var. 13 brachystachya Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 357.
1876.—"... In sepibus provinciae S. Paulo prope Hytu: Martius."
—Holotypus, collected XII. 1818 (fl), M! = NY Neg. 77550.
Unarmed, potentially arborescent shrubs and round-topped trees flowering when 2-5 m tall, variably pubescent either with short scattered subappressed hairs or with many erect gray hairs 0.2-0.5 mm, eglandular, the branchlets obtusangulate, the ample venulose lfts bicolored, when dry lustrous dark brown and either glabrous or minutely pubemlent above, beneath paler, dullrufous and either glabrous or pilosulous, the subvirgate or pyramidal panicle of short dense amentiform fl-spikes leafless or vestigially leafy proximally and exserted 1-3 dm from foliage, but its branchlets subtended by mdimentary lfstks each with a concave nectary.
Stipules narrowly lanceolate or subulate 1.5-4.5 mm, at base 0.3-0.9 mm, subpersistent.
Leaf-stalk of major lvs 2.5-8.5 cm, the petiole including obese hard pulvinus 4-8 mm, the longer (sometimes single) interpinnal segments 11-26 mm, the rachis openly grooved ventrally, spicules 0; a round or vertically elongate concave nectary 0.9-2.3 mm diam. between first pair of pinnae, smaller ones sometimes between succeeding pairs, and less often also between some pairs of lfts; pinnae 2- 5-, commonly either 2-3- or 2—4-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of distal pair 4-7 cm, its longer interfoliolar segments 10-21 mm; minute (deciduous) subulate paraphyllidia 0.1-0.45 mm next to pulvinus of each pinna; lfts of distal pair of pinnae 3-6-, usually 4- or 5-, exceptionally 5- 8-jug., accrescent distally, the terminal pair largest, the blade of these obliquely obovate or elliptic-obovate, obtuse or shallowly emarginate, minutely apiculate, (15-)20-55 x (10-) 16-33 mm, at base shallowly asymmetrically cordate, marginally revolute, the subcentric, straight or forwardly curved midrib giving rise on each side to 2-3 major (and sometimes intercalated minor) secondary nerves brochidodrome well within the margin, these and an open tertiary venulation prominulous on both faces of blade but more sharply so beneath.
Flower-spikes including short peduncle 1.5-3 cm, without filaments 4-5 mm diam., the fls at anthesis subcontiguous, the amentiform immature ones grayish-pubemlent; peduncular bracts ovate or lance-elliptic 0.6-1.5 mm; floral bracts submembranous 0.3-0.5 mm, persistent; flowers 5-merous 10-androus, some or many of each spike functionally staminate; calyx campanulate (0.6-)0.7-1.2 mm, pilosulous, the broadly triangular or deltate teeth 0.2- 0.4 mm; corolla (1.7-)2-2.5 mm, its erect, narrowly ovate subacute, strongly 1-nerved lobes (0.5-)0.7-l X 0.3-0.45 mm, pilosulous externally; filaments cream-colored, the longer ones exserted 1.8-3(-3.5) mm; anther-connective produced beyond thecae as a minute point; ovary subsessile, at anthesis glabrous or rarely puberulent.
Pods subsessile, in profile narrowly oblong ±50-100 X 11-15 mm, piano-compressed, cuneate at base and abmptly cuspidate at apex, the shallowly undulate rimlike replum ±0.8 mm diam., the papery, glabrous or pilosulous valves separating when ripe from replum and breaking up into 5-8 rectangular free-falling indehiscent articles 10-13 mm long; seeds plumply discoid 4.5-5 mm diam., the testa castaneous dull.
In cerrado and campo mpestre, 775-1200 m, scattered along both slopes of s. Chapada Diamantina and Sa. do Espinha^o in lat. 14°-21°S, from Sa.
Geral de Caitite in s.-centr. Bahia to Ouro Preto in s.-centr. Minas Gerais, and collected once in early days near Ytu in s.-w. S. Paulo.-Fl. (I-)II-IV. Map 3.
Within its range and environment M. pithecolobioides is the only mimosa that has petiolar nectaries and spicate flowers.
Within ser. Glanduliferae a lack of prickles and a free-standing, fmticose or arborescent growth-form are notable specific characters plausibly correlated with adaptation to cerrado and campo mpestre habitats.
The only other spicate Glanduliferae are prickly lianas, M. lawranceana of the northem Colombian Andes, and a rare and abnormal form of M. rufescens known only from Para.
The species nearest to M. pithecolobioides is the also freestanding and almost unarmed M. irrigua. endemic to the heights of Chapada Diamantina in north-central Bahia; but this has the petiolar nectary near mid-petiole and flowers in globose capitula.
Mimosa pithecolobioides is conspicuously variable in pubescence of stems and foliage.
The glabrate state, corresponding to the species as originally described and including the negligible var. brachystachya, is now known from the northem and southern points of the whole species-range and randomly between them.
The villosulous state appears dominant in north-central Minas Gerais, but not to the exclusion of the glabrate one.
The plants are otherwise identical, and there seems no advantage to be had from perpetuating a taxonomic distinction between them.
The manuscript epithet lasiogynum applied by Martius to the type of M. pithecolobioides was a misnomer, the ovary at anthesis being completely glabrous.
A(iii).
Series REVOLUTAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimadenia ser. Revolutae Barneby, ser. nov. monotypica andicola, nectario petiolari inter primum pinnamm par sito, pinnamm majorum foliolis usque 11-17-jugis minus quam 7 mm longis, floribus plemmque 5-meris semper diplostemoneis, necnon legumine valvatim dehiscenti praestans.—Sp. unica: M. revoluta Bentham.
Arborescent shrubs armed at or close below nodes with ±3 aculei.
Indumentum of short villi sometimes mixed with setaculei, nowhere glandular.
Stipules linear-setiform.
Lf-formula (iii-)iv-vi/ll-16; a pitted nectary between first (and often succeeding) pairs of pinnae; longer lfts ±3.5-6.5 mm.
Capitula globose or ellipsoid; flowers 5-merous 10-androus, ochroleucous; calyx campanulate; corolla ±2.5-4 mm; filaments almost free.
Pod broad-linear, strongly recurved or coiled, 6.5-10 mm wide, ± 5-10-seeded, the firm valves separating entire from aculeate replum ±1.5 mm wide.
Sp.
1, of Peruvian and Bolivian Andes above 2400 m. The singular M. revoluta is referred to sect. Mimadenia because of its petiolar nectaries and narrowly ovate anther-connectives, but it appears somewhat isolated in this setting and is perhaps as closely related to the partly sympatric ser. Andinae of sect. Batocaulon.
Resemblances in gross facies, many morphological features, and ecology are suggestive of this alignment.
It differs further, however, from ser. Andinae in the immediately infranodal position of the primary cauline prickles and in the more strongly recurved or commonly coiled pod girdled by a massive replum.
The curvature of the pod and the often orange-reddish color of the inner face of the valves are reminiscent of some Pithecellobia.
14.
Mimosa revoluta (Kunth) Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 409.
1842, based on Acacia revoluta Kunth, Mimoses 84, t. 26.
1821.— "Crescit in Regno Peruviano, prope urbem Caxamarca, alt. 1500 hex."
—Holotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland 3694, P-HBK! Fig.
2.
M. gonoclada Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 427.
1875.-"Tropical America: Yungas m Bolivia, D'Orbigny, n. 387."-Holotypus,fi?'<9r^/^«y i<57, P!; isotypi, G! W! M. soratensis Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 427.
1875.—"Tropical America: Bolivia near Sorata, Mandon, n. 757."-Holotypus, K!; isotypus, G! M. r^o/M^fl sensu Bentham, 1875:425; Macbride, 1943: 94.
Stiffly branched bushy and potentially arborescent shrubs 1-5 m with usually deeply channeled and stoutly ribbed stems armed at or immediately below all or most nodes with 1 infrapetiolar and 2 infrastipular aculei, these commonly stout ascending or horizontal, basally dilated and stramineous or brownish, sometimes reduced to small weak conical prickles, the obtuse ribs of internodes either smooth, papillate, or rarely densely setaculeate and like all If-axes and peduncles densely finely or minutely puberulent with erect hairs 0.05-0.2(-0.3) mm, the foliage olivaceous subconcolorous, the plane lfts glabrous sublustrous above, dull glabrous beneath, minutely ciliolate, the globose or ellipsoid capitula either solitary in axil of relatively ample primary lvs, or on axillary branchlets, then either subtended by smaller simplified lvs or pseudofasciculate.
Stipules erect linear-subsetiform 1.5- 5 X 0.2-0.4 mm, early dry caducous.
Leaves dimorphic or potentially so: If-stk of primary lvs (2.5-)3-6 cm, the petiole 3.5-10 mm, at middle 0.5-1.1 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 4- 10, the ventral groove bridged between pinnapairs and charged always between the first pair and sometimes also between succeeding ones with a subsessile pitted nectary 0.4-1.2 mm diam.; pinnae (3-)4-6-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the axis of longer distal ones 2-A cm, the interfoliolar segments (1.2-)1.5-2.8(-3.5) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 11-16-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.4-1.2 mm distant from erect or refracted paraphyllidia 0.3-0.9 mm, the blades narrowly oblong or oblong-eUiptic from obtusangulate or semicordate base, abmptly apiculate, those near mid-rachis (3-)3.5-6.5 X 0.9-2 mm, 3 .
2 ^ times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath weakly 1-2 (-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2.5-3.5, simple or beyond middle 1-2-branched on posterior side, the branches sometimes anastomosing with the inner posterior primary nerve, the outermost posterior nerve, when present, short or obscure; lf-stks of axillary 2 mm.
FIG. 2.
Mimosa revoluta (Kunth) Bentham: A. Fruiting branchlet.
B. Flowering node.
C. Proximal segment of If-stk (ventral view), showing nectary and paraphyllidia.
D. Flower + bract.
E. Pod, comparatively weakly setose. (A from B. Becker 749; B-D from Feuerer 23o65a; E from Feuerer lo293.) MAP 5.
Parts of Central and South America.
Ranges of M revoluta (Kunth) Bentham and M. tenuiflora (Willdenow) Poiret. brachyblasts (sometimes developing after fall of primary lvs) 5-25 mm, the pinnae only 2-4-jug., their rachis to 5-20 mm, the lfts 6-10-jug., 2-5 mm long. Peduncles (1-) 1.5-4.5 cm; capitula without filaments 5.5-11 x 5.5-7 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid fl-buds glabrous; bracts linear-spatulate or obovate 0.6-1 mm, ciliolate, caducous; flowers 5-(6)-merous diplostemonous, greenish-white or ochroleucous, all or almost all bisexual; calyx campanulate submembranous brownish 0.6-1.8(-2.2) mm, the tube minutely pubemlent or glabrate extemally, the short-denticulate or merely undulate rim ciliolate; corolla narrowly tmmpet-shaped (2.3-)2.5- 3.3(-4.2) mm, the erect or spreading lanceolate lobes 0.8-1.4(-2.2) x 0.5-0.8 mm, glabrous dorsally, papillate at margin; filaments fused at very base into an obscure stemonozone, exserted 3- 4.5 mm; anthers ovate 0.6-0.7 mm.
Pods 1-several per capitulum, sessile, in profile broad-linear recurved through V 3 circle to coiled backward through 1.5 circles, measured along curvature 20-60 X 6.5-10 mm, (4-)5-8(-10)-seeded, the stout replum 1.3-1.6 mm wide, its convex and rarely also its concave periphery with 1-3 rows of straight erect stramineous aculei 1-5 mm, the firmly papery, green or fuscous valves low-colliculate over each seed and depressed between them, extemally minutely puberulent overaU and either unarmed or aculeate like the replum but more shortly so, internally smooth orange eseptate, when ripe separating entire from replum along both sutures but more readily along the seminiferous one; seeds obliquely basipetal, compressed-obovoid 4-5 x 3-4 mm, the brown or olivaceous testa smooth sublustrous.
On dry hillsides, on rocky streambanks, and surviving at the edge offieldsand terraced milpa.
2500-3300 m, discontinuously dispersed along the Pemvian and Bolivian Andes in lat. 7°-18°S: in Pem from Cajamarca s. to Cuzco, mostly on the Amazon slope but crossing the crest w.-ward into Ancash; Norand Sur-Yungas in La Paz and Cochabamba, Bolivia.—R. almost throughout the year, the fls and ripe or ripening fmits often coeval.
Map 5.
This superficially variable species appears in Bentham's revision (1875: 425, 427) under three names: M. revoluta, M. gonoclada and M. soratensis.
Only the first of these was credited with petiolar nectaries, although in reality all are alike in this respect.
Granted the nectary, M. soratensis is essentially identical to M. revoluta.
Mimosa gonoclada was likened by Bentham to M. (Andinae) montana and distinguished from it chiefly by deeply sulcate branches (a feature common in M. revoluta) and scabrous or, as I would term it, densely setaculeate stems.
Bentham interpreted this array of setaculei as aculei sparsi, therefore significantly different in kind from the usually three infranodal aculei of ser. Andinae.
But M. gonoclada, of which the holotype is now supplemented by Beck 7458 (NY) from prov. Ayopaya, Cochabamba, has setaculei supplementary to, not replacing, the primary nodal prickles characteristic of M. revoluta, together with its nectaries and coiled pods.
This scabrous form of M. revoluta, known only from the southem edge of the whole range of the species, may deserve some subordinate taxonomic rank, but is emphatically not specifically distinguishable.
The earliest known collection of M. revoluta is in the Ruiz and Pavon collection, distributed as "Mimosa cornigera'"' (BM!).
Microphyllidious arborescent shrubs of subequatorial montane habitat, pilosulous but esetose and eglandular, armed either with pairs of immediately infranodal straight aculei or with many scattered recurved ones; a nectary on petiole shortly below first pair of pinnae and 1-2 between furthest pairs; capitula either ellipsoid or shortly s^icdXe; flowers whitish 4-merous diplostemonous.
Spp. 2, of s. Ecuador and n.-w. Pem.
The series Nothacaciae is morphologically isolated in Mimosa and conjectures as to its tme affinities will remain no more than that until fmits are obtained.
The cupular petiolar nectaries invite comparison with M. revoluta, also Andean, and with the mostly tropical lowland ser. Glanduliferae.
The series differs from M. revoluta in tetramerous (not pentamerous) flowers, in the infrapinnal, not intrapinnal position of the first petiolar nectary, and in elaborate leaf-formula of viii-xix/26-35 (not iii-vi/11-16).
The relatively macrophyllidious Glanduliferae dire like Nothacaciae in position of leaf-nectaries and some of them in tetramerous flowers, but are distinguished by peculiar glandular and peltate trichomes.
The only other Mimosa with petiolar nectaries is M. myriadenia, which has the indumentum of Glanduliferae combined with loosely spicate, haplostemonous flowers.
Conspectus of ser. Nothacaciae Mimosa 15. nothacacia Bameby 16. townsendii Bameby A(iv).
Series NOTHACACLVE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimadenia ser. Nothacaciae Barneby, ser. nov., ser. Revolutis ut videtur proxima, sed flosculis tetrameris, nectario petiolari infra (nec inter) primum pinnamm par sito, foliisque multipinnatis microphyllidiis diversa.—Frutices subarborescentes Andini esetosi eglandulosi, aculeis nunc recurvis sparsis nunc rectis geminis infranodialibus armati; nectaria petiolaria singulum infra primum pinnamm par et 1-2 inter paria ultima; capitula densiflora vel breviter spicata, flosculis 4-meris diplostemoneis albis.—Sp. typica: M. nothacacia Bameby.
Key to species of ser. Nothacaciae 1.
Ribs of stems and lf-stks armed with close files of cat's-claw aculei; stipules 5-8 mm; midrib of lfts only a trifle forwardly displaced; capitula 5- 6 mm long; n. Peru (Piura-Lambayeque) 15.
M. nothacacia (p. 59).
1.
Stems armed only at nodes with a pair of straight subhorizontal aculei, the lf-stks unarmed; stipules ± 1 mm; midrib of lfts dividing blade ± 1: 4; capitula 8-15 mm long; s. Ecuador (Loja).
16.
M. townseruiii (p. 60).
15.
Mimosa nothacacia Bameby, sp. nov., nulli (praeter sequentem M. townsendii) arete affinis, petiolis nectario cupuliformi instmctis, foliolis parvis flosculisque diplostemoneis cum M. revoluta comparabilis, sed ab ea caulibus seriatim (nec ad nodos) multiaculeatis, nectario infra (nec inter) primum pinnamm par orienti, pinnis foliolisque plus quam duplo numerosioribus flosculisque 4 (nec 5)-meris distinctissima; a Glanduliferis, quoad aculeos uncinatos sparsos et nectarium infrapinnale similibus, foliis microphyllidiis necnon trichomatum peltatorum defectu longius distans.—Peru.
Piura: prov. Huancabamba ["Lambayeque"], km 28 e. of Olmos on Marafion highway, 1150-1200 m, 6.1.1964 (fl), Paul C Hutchison & J. K. Wright 3438.— Holotypus, UC; isotypi, K, NY, TEX, US 2469767.
Amply microphyllidious treelets attaining 3 m, armed on 5 angles of stems and on dorsal and lateral ribs of lf-stks with files of recurved broadbased cat's-claw aculei 0.5-2.5 mm, finely loosely pubemlent throughout with plain hairs to 0.25 mm mixed with a few thickened reddish trichomes but nowhere either setose or glandular or lepidote, the lfts bicolored, brown-olivaceous above, paler beneath, the inflorescence an efoliate panicle of small dense, plumply ellipsoid capitula exserted 1-2.5 dm from foliage.
Stipules erect incurved linear-setiform 5-8 x 0.4—0.6 mm, convex dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 6-12.5 cm, the petiole including firm dilated pulvinus 13-24 mm, at middle 0.8-1.2 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 4-8 mm, the broad shallow ventral sulcus continuous between pinnae (spicules 0); a fleshy bell-shaped nectary 1.5-2.5 mm diam. sessile below first pair of pinnae and similar ones, a little smaller, between the furthest 1- 2 pairs; pinnae 12-19-jug., a little decrescent at each end of If-stk, the rachis of longer ones 2.5- 4.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.6 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 28-35-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair ±0.5 mm distant from ascending subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.4 mm, the blades narrowly lance-oblong from bluntly short-auriculate base, abruptly acute or short-acuminulate and often a little porrect at apex, those near mid-rachis 3-5.5 x 0.7-1.2 mm, 4-5 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath faintly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the immersed but discolored midrib a little forwardly displaced, the posterior nerve very short and obscure.
Peduncles 2-A per node of inflorescence, subfiliform 6-11 mm; capitula without filaments 5_6 X 4-4.5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds thinly pilosulous at tip, greenish-ochroleucous, the receptacle attaining 3 x 0.5 mm; bracts linear-oblanceolate 0.4-0.6 mm caducous; flowers sessile, 4-merous 8-androus, all (so far as seen) bisexual; calyx turbinate-campanulate 0.5-0.7 mm, glabrous extemally, the unequal triangular teeth 0.1-0.15 mm, minutely ciliolate; corolla white, narrowly turbinate-campanulate 1.6-2.2 mm, the erect ovate, shallowly concave 1-nerved lobes 0.6-0.8 x 0.6-0.8 mm, slightly thickened at apex; filaments white, united through 0.3 mm around stipe of ovary, exserted 4.5 mm; ovary after fertilization whitepilosulous; pod unknown.
On steep slopes in dense brush-woodland at 1150 m, known only from the vicinity of the type-locality on the Pacific slope of the Andes near the Piura-Lambayeque boundary (e. of Olmos; Lim6n), at ±5°55'S in n.-w. Peru.—Fl.
In(-?).
From its only known close relative, M. townsendii, which occurs about 150 km due north in Loja, Ecuador, M. nothacacia is instantly distinguished by the armament of cat's-claw prickles along the five angles of the stem and along the ribs of leaf-stalks, by elongate stipules, by shorter, plumply ellipsoid capitula, and by subcentrically costate leaflets.
The type-collection, consisting of 23 duplicates, was distributed as an Acacia akin to^. serra Benth.,
under which name isotypes are likely to be found in the following herbaria besides those listed in the diagnosis above: BR, C, E, R, G, GH, HEID, L, LE, LIL, M, MICH, MO, P, R, S, USM, WIS.
16.
Mimosa townsendii Bameby, sp. nov., foliomm petiolo plemmque nectario cupulari depresso instmcto floscuhsque tetrameris M. nothacaciae affinis, sed ab ea caulibus tantum at nodos aculeis geminis (nec secus angulos seriatim) aculeatis, petiolis inermibus, stipulis minimis (± 1, nec 5-8 mm longis), necnon foliolomm costa valde excentrica diversa.— Ecuador.
Loja: Cariamanga, ±2150 m, 24.
XI.1910 (fl), C. H. T. Townsend 949.- Holotypus, US 534438 = NY Neg. 12186.
Treelets armed at nodes of young branches with a pair of subhorizontal broad-based aculei 3-5 mm, pubemlent throughout with plain hairs 0.1- 0.2 mm, the stems densely loosely so, the subconcolorous lfts finely strigulose on both faces, the young inflorescence a leafless (but hysteranthously foliate) panicle of short fl-spikes.
Stipules subulate 1 mm or less, early caducous.
Leafstalks 4.5-11 cm, the petiole 8-13 x 1.1-1.6 mm, the interpinnal segments 5-7 mm, the ventral groove continuous and spicules 0 but a depressed circular nectary at tip of If-stk and in many lvs also shortly below first pair of pinnae; pinnae 8-15-jug., the longer ones 3.5^ cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.8-1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 26-30-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair ±0.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia ±0.5 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from obtusangulate base, deltate at apex, those near mid-rachis ±3.5-4 x 1-1.3 mm, 3.5-4 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath weakly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib forwardly displaced to divide blade ± 1: 4, the posterior nerve short and weak.
Peduncles 1-3 per node, or 1 paired with a branchlet, at anthesis 1-1.5 cm; spikes dense, without filaments 8-15 X 4 mm, the minute caducous bracts much shorter than the obtuse, minutely puberulent ^-hnds; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.5 mm, the minute depressed-deltate teeth at most 0.1 mm; corolla 2.3 mm, the ovate ascending 1 -nerved lobes 1.1 x 0.75 mm; filaments white, united at very base into a stemonozone ±0.2 mm, exserted 5 mm; ovary pubemlent; pod unknown.
In unknown habitat, but to be expected in xeromorphic scmb thickets near 2150 m, known only from the type-locality on the w. slope of the Ecuadorian Andes close to the Pemvian border, long. 79°40'W.-n. XI-XII(-?).
In petiolar nectaries both at tip of leaf-stalk and also in some leaves on leaf-stalk below the first pair of leaflets, as well as in the tetramerous flower, M. townsendii seems closely related only to M. nothacacia.
From this it is strongly differentiated by armature of geminate, immediately infranodal, straight (not serially scattered uncinate) aculei, by tiny stipules and by displaced midrib of leaflets.
In general habit and in paired cauline aculei it resembles some Andinae, but these are all innocent of extrafloral nectaries and have pentandrous flowers.
Superficially M. weberbaueri appears most similar in leaf-formula and ellipsoid flower-spikes, but this is otherwise typical of Andinae.
B. Sectio BATOCAULON DeCandolle Mimosa sect. Batocaulon DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 429 (sphalm.
Bataucaulon).
1825 & Mem. Legum. pt.
7: 419.
1826.—Sp. typica: M. rubicaulis Lamarck.—Included by Bentham, 1842: 390, in sect. Habbasia.
M. sect. Habbasia sensu auct. post-candoUeanorum, ex parte.
Mostly trees, shrubs, and fmtescent vines, fewer herbaceous and none tmly monocarpic; stems variably armed at the nodes, on the internodes, or serially along all ribs of stem with straight or recurved aculei; branching unior bimodal, in the latter case the units of inflorescence on lateral brachyblasts.
Indumentum of stems and lvs composed in varying proportions of: a) fine incurved puberulence; b) short plain hairs; c) discolored granular (non secretory) trichomes; d) gland-tipped set(ul)ae; e) setaculei, the two last sorts exceptional and any one or more sorts commonly absent, but no basally dilated setae, and the lfts ciliolate, if at all, with fine minute hairs only.
Pinnae mostly 2-pluri-jug., but 1-jug. in some Farinosae, Boreales, Auriculatae, the lvs ofM. unipinnata simply pinnate.
Flowers spicate (subracemose) or capitate, 3-5(-6)-merous, except in ser. Plurijugae and some Fagaracanthae diplostemonous; calyx campanulate, the orifice denticulate or tmncate, never setose-ciliate or pappiform.
Fruit either a craspedium or (less often) valvate.
Ovules commonly 6-12, in some Stipellares only 2-4 and in Plurijugae and Quadrivalves to 20-30.
Spp. ±190, of which 174 American, ranging from n.-centr. (at ±44°N), e. and s.-w. United States to Bolivia, n.-e. and centr. Argentina, and Umguay (35°S).
The section Batocaulon is equivalent to Bentham's esetose division of sect. Habbasia altered by excision of ser. Glanduliferae and the species M. revoluta (transferred herein to sect. Mimadenia) and by the additions of haplostemonous ser. Plurijugae (transferred from sect. Eumimosa) and the multiracial M. quadrivalvis, restored to Mimosa from nearly two centuries of exile in Schrankia.
It is further enriched by many species unknown to Bentham in 1875, among them the spurious genus Schranckiastrum Hassler.
And it readily accommodates those imperfectly diplostemonous Fagaracanthae which have sometimes been associated with sect. Mimosa.
The definition lacks the neat uniformity in stamen number that characterized Bentham's section Habbasia, but it appears to me more successful in bringing the like into proximity, even though it amounts to no more than a not quite universal absence of plain cauline setae and invariable absence of setiform cilia on leaflet margins.
The few exceptional setose species admitted to sect. Batocaulon are there isolated from one another and individually find no direct connection with any particular species or series in sect. Habbasia sens, restr.
In every respect sect. Batocaulon is the most polymorphic section of the genus, and it contains all the elements from which the rest of it can theoretically be derived.
Morphological features presumed to be primitive that are common but far from ubiquitous in the series are pluripinnate leaves, spicate units of inflorescence, and pentamerous flowers.
The first of these is generally preserved in sect. Habbasia but becomes exceptional in sect. Mimosa; the second is infrequent and sporadic in both Habbasia and Mimosa, and the third is unknown (except in random individual flowers) in both.
Gland-tipped setae are found in few, all presumably advanced species or series of sect. Batocaulon.
They become general, though not universal, in sect. Habbasia, and are extremely rare in sect. Mimosa.
Valvate dehiscence of the fmits appears to have evolved independently at different levels of specialization in other groups, equally in sect. Batocaulon, Habbasia, and Mimosa.
The relationship of sect. Batocaulon to sect. Calothamnos is discussed under the latter.
Conspectus of sect. Batocaulon H Fls either spicate or capitate, either 5-, or 4-, or (in 2 fruticose Bimucronatae) 3-merous; gland-tipped setae lacking except in few Leiocarpae, Farinosae, and M. (Bimucronatae) lewisii. i. ser. Distachyae Bameby.—Fls 5-merous and (except M. mollis) spicate; cauline aculei either infrastipular or infrapetiolar; fruit a craspedium.—16 spp. of s.-w. United States, Mexico, Cuba, n.-w. S. America. ii. ser. Andinae Bameby.—Fls 5-merous and capitatQ; cauline aculei infrastipular; fruit valvate.—4 spp. of the Andes of s. Colombia, Ecuador and n.-centr. Peru. iii. ser. Acanthocarpae Bentham.—Fls 5-, seldom 4- or 4-5-merous, either spicate or capitate, the units of inflorescence borne mostly on long-shoots, if on brachyblasts the cauline aculei infrastipular; fruit linear in profile, valvate; lf-stks espiculate.—13 spp. of Mexico and s.-w. United States. iv. ser. Acantholobae Bameby.—Flowers either spicate or capitate, from long-shoots; cauline aculei infrastipular; fruit in profile broadly elliptic, valvate; lf-stks espiculate.— 1 sp. (pluriracial) of xerothermic lowland Pacific N. and n. S. America.
V. ser. Boreales Bameby.—Fls 5-, rarely 4-merous, capitate; fruit either a craspedium or (less often) valvate, but the peduncles arising from brachyblasts; cauline aculei primarily infrapetiolar.-10 spp. of upland interior Mexico and s.-w. United States. vi. ser. Leiocarpae Bentham.—Fls 4-merous and spicate (except subcapitate Paraguayan M.fiebrigii);indumentum highly diverse; cauline aculei primarily infrastipular but often 0; fruit a craspedium.—27 spp., most numerous and diverse in planaltine, s.-e., and n.-e. Brazil, few w. to Paraguay and Bolivia, few n. to n. S. America and tropical Mexico. vii. ser. Bimucronatae Bameby.—Fls either 4- or 3-merous, capitate; cauline aculei primarily infrastipular; fruit a craspedium; microphyllidious trees and shrubs.—9 spp. of tropical e. Brazil, 1 s.-w. to Paraguay and Argentina, and disjunctly to n. S. America and s. Mexico, 1 widely cultivated. viii. ser. Leucaenoideae Bameby.—Fls either 5- or 4-merous, capitate; otherwise as the preceding except macrophyllidious. — 3 spp. of upland e. and s. Mexico. ix. ser. Rubicaules Bentham.—Fls either 4- or 5-merous, capitate; stems serially aculeate; fmit a craspedium; vines.—15 spp. or more, 4 of tropical and warm-temperate Mexico and adj. United States, the rest in Africa, Madagascar, and s.-e. Asia.
X. ser. Fagaracanthae Bameby.—Fls either 4- or 5-merous, mostly haploor imperfectly diplostemonous, the inner whorl of stamens variously depleted; armament diverse; fmit a craspedium; free-standing or sarmentose shmbs (one with lvs reduced to phyllodes). —7 spp. of Cuba and Hispaniola. xi. ser. Bahamenses Bameby. - R s mostly 4-merous, capitate; cauline aculei infrastipular; fmit a craspedium, its replum broadly lacerate-winged. — 1 sp. of s.-e. Mexico and Belize, and of the Bahamas. xii. ser. Farinosae Bameby.—Fls 4-merous, capitate; branching bimodal, the peduncles arising from brachyblasts; cauline aculei primarily infrastipular; fmit a craspedium; xeromorphic microphyUous shmbs and trees.—4 spp. of s.-e. Bolivia, Paraguay, Argentina, Umguay. xiii. ser. Ephedroideae Bentham.—Like the last, but unarmed and the foliage scanty, ephemeral, and the peduncles from homotinous branches; stems striate, photosynthetic—1 sp. of n.-centr. Argentina. xiv. ser. Echinocaulae Bameby.—Rs 4-merous, capitate; tall herb with unarmed, usually hispidly setose stems; fruit a craspedium.—1 sp. of planaltine Brazil.
XV. ser. Paucifoliatae Bentham.—Rs 4-merous, capitate; armament diverse, sometimes 0, the stems in one setose (but humifuse); either herbaceous or only softly suffmtescent, not tmly shmbby, the lvs either microphyUidious or phyllodial; fmit a craspedium.—16 spp. of extra-Amazonian Brazil, Paraguay, n.-e. Argentina, 1 widespread and weedy through tropical S. America and n. to Mexico and W. Indies (naturalized in Paleotropics), 1 in Belize. nil Rs 4-merous, capitate; excretory gland-tipped set(ul)ae or sessile glands actually or potentially present; cauline aculei 1-3 per node or 0; fmit a craspedium, or in few extratropical S. American Stipellares valvate. xvi. ser. Glandulosae (Bentham) Bameby.—Stipules 1-nerved; lf-stks spiculate; paraphyllidia subulate; pinnae 2-10-jug., microphyllidious; fruit a craspedium.—7 spp. of s. Mexico and s. to Brazil and Paraguay. xvii. ser. Stipellares Bentham.—Stipules l-3(-5)-nerved; lf-stks espiculate; pinnae 2-10-jug., microphyllidious; paraphyllidia expanded, resembling diminished lfts; fmit either a craspedium or valvate. — 17 spp. of extratropical s. S. America, few extending shortly across the tropic line into e. Bolivia, Paraguay, and s.-e. Brazil. xviii. ser. Auriculatae Bameby.—Stipules foliaceous, striately many-nerved; aculei 0; lf-stks espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., macrophyllidious; paraphyllidia expanded; pod a craspedium. — 1 sp. of s.-e. Bolivia.
W Rs 3-merous, capitate except in M. caesalpiniifolia; eglandular except some Cordistipulae; aculei and fmits various. xix. ser. Caesalpiniifoliae Bentham.—Arborescent; aculei few, primarily infrastipular; lfts large, craspedoneurous; fls either capitate or spicate; fmit a craspedium.—2 spp. of e. Brazil.
XX. ser. Ceratoniae Bameby.—Vines, serially armed with cat's-claw aculei; fmit valvate.—4 spp. of e. Brazil, 1 n. to W. Indies. xxi. ser. Cordistipulae Bameby.—Small shmbs and herbs, potentially glandular; armament various, sometimes 0; lf-stks espiculate; no paraphyllidia; fmit a craspedium. — 13 spp. of e. Brazil, 1 interruptedly widespread to Paraguay, Argentina, e. Mexico. xxii. ser. Campicolae Bameby.—Eglandular; pinnae 2-7-jug.; lf-stks spiculate; paraphyllidia present; fmit a craspedium.—2 spp. of e. extra-Amazonian Brazil. xxiii. ser. Filipedes Bameby.—Like the last, but pinnae 1-jug. —5 spp. of e. extra-Amazonian Brazil, one also in n. Venezuela.
Rs 5-merous diplostemonous; no glandular setae; armament of cat's-claw aculei; fmit a linear pod with broad replum and narrow continuous valves. xxiv. ser. Quadrivalves Bameby. —1 pluriracial sp. of wide tropical and extratropical dispersal, from n.- centr. and e. United States to Argentina; Puerto Rico.
Rs 5-merous haplostemonous; no glandular setae; armament of cat's-claw aculei; fmit a broad-linear craspedium with narrow replum. xxv. ser. Plurijugae Karsten. — 5 spp. of wide dispersal from s. Mexico to e. Brazil and Paraguay.
The series of sect. Batocaulon have to a great extent undergone independent radiation in North and South America, and only few, widespread or weedy species are known to occur in both continents.
It is therefore practical to provide separate keys for the three geographic divisions of: a) continental North America (immediately following); b) West Indies (p. 65); and c) South America (p. 65).
Key to series and some species of sect. Batocaulon in continental North America 1.
Rs spicate (racemose), the axis of each partial inflorescence 1 cm or more.
2.
Hypophyllum of lfts charged with globose glands ±0.1 mm diam. and with medusiform (many branched) setulae; fls densely stellate overall; trees of the Caribbean lowlands in Honduras 86.
M. schomburgkii (p. 156).
2.
Hypophyllum of lfts sometimes minutely glandular but never charged with branched setulae; fls either glabrous or silky with simple hairs.
3.
Lfts charged beneath with smafl semi-immersed glands.
4.
Lf-formula iv-xL/17-40; lf-stks spiculate; calyx 4-angulate and its teeth cucuUately incurved; lowland Oaxaca, Mexico and s.-e. in dry woodland to South America 69.
M. tenuiflora (p. 135).
4.
Lf-formula vi-vii/16-17; lf-stks espiculate; calyx terete and its teeth erect; upland Hidalgo, Mexico 11.
M. puberula (p. 143).
3.
Lfts eglandular.
5.
Stems densely pilosulous with short erect, matte hairs; spikes axiUary to and surpassed by multifoliolate lvs; valves of pod linear-oblong 5-7 mm wide, falling in one piece; s.-w. state of Mexico 31.
M. nanchititlana (p. 92).
5.
Stems either silky-pilosulous with shining silky hairs or glabrate, or spikes terminally pseudoracemose, or both; valves of pod when linear articulate when ripe, when fafling in one piece over 15 mm wide.
6.
Corolla 4-merous, glabrous; filaments white; arborescent South American sp. disjunct in lowland Pacific Mexico (Guerrero and Oaxaca); fmit a slender stipitate craspedium; var. leiocarpa of: 61.
M. arenosa (j).
123).
6.
CoroUa either 4- or 5-merous, but if glabrous 5-merous; filaments commonly pink or Hlac, if white the corolla 5-merous.
7.
Corolla glabrous and filaments white; pod in profile broadly elliptic, the valves at least 15 mm wide, falling in one piece; lf-formula of fully developed cauline lvs vii-xv/15(- 18)-34(-^0), simpler only in some uppermost lvs; Guatemala and Costa Rica; vars. of: 50.
M. acantholoba (p. 106).
7.
CoroUa either silky or glabrous, but if glabrous the filaments normally pink; pod hnear in profile, the valves at most 10(-12) mm wide, the dehiscence craspedial; lf-formula approaching that of the preceding only when corolla densely silky and filaments bright pink, mostly much simpler; widespread in Mexico, n. into s.-w. United States B(i). ser. Distachyae (p. 67).
1.
Rs capitate, the capitula either globose or plumply eUipsoid and not more than 1.5 times as long as diam., the axis of each capitulum less than 5(-7) mm long. 8.
Rs 3-merous.
9.
Stoutly armed, arborescent shmbs of lowland Pacific Oaxaca; no gland-tipped setulae; pod at least 8 mm wide, lomentiform, the crustaceous valves breaking when ripe transversely between successive pairs of seeds and also through the replum 92.
M. hexandra (p. 166).
9.
Unarmed slender subshmbs less than 1 m of Gulf lowlands in Tamaulipas; upper stems and often some lvs glandular-setulose; valves of pod chartaceous, and craspedially dehiscent 170.
M. guaranitica (p. 267).
8.
Rs prevailingly 4-5(-6)-merous.
10.
Stems and lf-stks serially armed with cat's-claw aculei.
11.
Rs almost invariably 4-merous.
12.
Slender herbs or functionally herbaceous subshmbs less than 1 m, exceptionally more; pod 3-4.5(-5) mm wide B(xv). ser. Paucifoliatae (p. 197).
12.
Taller, often rank vines 1 m upward; pod (5-)7-18 mm wide B(ix). ser. Rubicaules (p. 176).
11.
Rs 5-merous (occasional but obviously random fls in some capitula 4- or 6-merous).
13.
Pinnae of longer lvs 6-18-jug.; pods broad and flat, the unarmed valves (6-)7-22 mm wide; tropical lowland Pacific Mexico s.-ward B(xxv). ser. Plurijugae (p. 303).
13.
Pinnae of longer lvs 1-9-jug., but not over 5-jug. in tropical Mexico or s.-ward; pods linear in outline, obtusely tetragonal or compressed tetragonal, the valves less than 6 mm wide and in s. Mexico narrower or no broader than the dilated replum; Panama to n.-centr. and e. United States B(xxiv). ser. Quadrivalves (p. 290).
10.
Stems either unarmed or, if armed, then with sets of 1-3 aculei per node (or intemode), if aculei rarely more numerous then straight or almost so and the lf-stks only very exceptionally aculeolate.
14.
Stems and lf-stks charged with gland-tipped setulae B(xvi). ser. Glandulosae (p. 227).
14.
Stems and lf-stks eglandular.
15.
Macrophyllidious, the larger lfts 1-4 x 0.4-2.8 cm; e. and s. Mexico B(viii). ser. Leucaenoideae (p. 174).
15.
Microphyllidious, the larger lfts either less than 1 cm long or less than 4 mm wide, or both.
16.
Lvs normally bipinnate, the lfts home on secondary axes.
17.
Either pinnae of larger lvs more than 4-jug., or lfts of longer pinnae more than 9-jug., or both.
18.
Rs always glabrous; body of pod broadly elliptic in profile, 16-23 mm wide, the valves when ripe separating in one piece from replum; Pacific lowlands s.-ward from Sinaloa 50.
M. acantholoba (p. 106).
18.
Rs sericeous, pubemlent, or glabrous, but pod linear in profile and not more than 12 mm wide; mostly of upland or interior Mexico, if coastal the fls sericeous.
19.
Indumentum of stems, lvs and fls composed of lustrous silky hairs; pod a craspedium; M. mollis and subcapitulate forms of M adenantheroides in: B(i). ser. Distachyae (p. 67.
1991] BARNEBY : SENSITIVAE CENSITAE ( M / M < 9 5 ^ ) 65 19.
Indumentum of matte hairs or almost 0, in M. galeottii in part of setaculei, the stems then hispid; valves of pod separating from replum in one piece B(iii). ser. Acanthocarpae (p. 90).
17.
Both pinnae 1-4-jug. and lfts of longer pinnae less than 10-jug. 20.
Stems rusty-pilosulous; capitula axillary to coeval lvs on homotinous branchlets; replum of pod broadly lacerate-winged and its valves articulate when ripe; Yucatan Peninsula 113.
M. bahamensis (p. 189).
20.
Stems finely pubemlent or glabrous, the hairs not rusty; if replum of pod continuously winged (as in M. lacerata of upland centr. Mexico) its valves separating in one piece from replum.
21.
Aculei of stem primarily infrastipular and arising immediately below the nodes; dehiscence of pod valvate, the valves separating in one piece from replum; capitula almost always from contemporary longshoots B(iii). ser. Acanthocarpae (p. 90).
21.
Aculei of stem primarily infrapetiolar, the infrastipular ones, when present, downwardly displaced on intemode; dehiscence of pod either craspedial or valvate, but when valvate the capitula all arising from brachyblasts B(v). ser. Boreales (p. 110).
16.
Lvs simply pinnate, the 1-3 pairs of lfts borne on primary If-stk; microphyllous shmbs of Chihuahuan Desert 59.
M unipinnata (p. 118).
Key to species and one endemic series of sect. Batocaulon in West Indies 1.
Lvs aU or most reduced to linear phyUodia; shmbs of Hispaniola 112.
M. extranea (p. 187).
1.
Lvs all normally bipinnate.
2.
Rs loosely spicate.
3.
Lf-formula ii-iv/3-5; cauline aculei solitary, immediately infrapetiolar; fls 5-merous and filaments pink; var. oligacantha of: 31.
M. distachya (p. 80).
3.
Lf-formula iv-x/16-45; cauline aculei (sometimes absent) intemodal, on infrastipular ribs of internodes; fls 4-merous and filaments white; Martinique, naturalized on Puerto Rico, perhaps elsewhere 61.
M. arenosa (p. 123).
2.
Rs capitate.
4.
Either each pair of pinnae (and often also the furthest pair of lfts of each pinna) subtended by a pair of recurved aculei, or the 4-5-merous fls incompletely diplostemonous (the perfect stamens 5-8), or both at once; Cuba and Hispaniola only B(x). ser. Fagaracanthae (p. 180).
4.
Armament, when present, not as above, and androecium regularly isomerous.
5.
Corolla 3-merous; fmit a broad-linear piano-compressed, valvately dehiscent pod 1-2 cm wide; serially prickly vines with whitish filaments 166.
M. ceratonia (p. 259).
5.
Corolla either 4- or 5-merous; fmit much less than 1 cm wide and if the valves continuous then not piano-compressed.
6.
Stiflly branched shmbs armed at or below nodes with 1-3 prickles per node.
7.
Lf-formula ±v-ix/20-30; stems glabrate; pod neither winged nor tomentulose, 5.5-7.5 mm wide; planted and perhaps naturalized, but not on the Bahamas 89.
M. bimucronata (p. 162).
7.
Lf-formula ii-iv/4-6; young stems and If-axes densely rusty-pilosulous; pod broadly wing-margined, including the wings 9-15 mm wide, and tomentulose overall; Bahama Is 113.
M. bahamensis (p. 189).
6.
Weakly fmtescent, difliise herbs or subshmbs armed on ribs of all intemodes and on Ifaxes with files of cat's-claw aculei.
8.
Rs 4-merous; fmit a linear, piano-compressed, 3-8-seeded craspedium 10-20 x 3^.5 mm, the articles much wider than the slender replum; Greater Antilles 120.
M. diplotricha (p. 200).
8.
Rs 5-merous; fruit a bluntly 4-angulate, long-linear, at least 20-seeded pod 120-140 X 5 mm, the continuous valves either narrower or no wider than the broadly dilated replum; Puerto Rico only; var. urbaniana of: 190.
Af. quadrivalvis (p. 293).
Key to series and some species of sect. Batocaulon in South America 1.
Rs uniformly, or with few random exceptions in any one capitulum, 5-merous; n.-w. South America (Andes n.-ward from centr. Peru, Pacific equatorial lowlands, and Caribbean slope in n.-w. Venezuela and Colombia).
2.
Stems armed on either or both the infrastipular and the infrapetiolar ribs of intemodes with straight, subhorizontal, or gently recurved aculei; fls crowded into globose or plumply oblong-ellipsoid capitula; s. Colombia, Ecuador and Pem.
3.
Pod in outline broadly elliptic, at middle 16-20 mm wide, the sutures subequally convex; Itts ot longer pinnae (of lvs below inflorescence) (15-)18-34(-^0)-jug.; Pacific lowlands ^ejow 350 m. B(iv.) ser. Acantholobae (p. 105).
3.
Pod in outline linear or linear-oblong, at middle 5-14 mm diam., the sutures paraUel or nearly so (often decurved); lfts of longer pinnae 6-20-jug.; Andean highlands 1300-3500 m, s. Colombia to centr. Pem B(ii). ser. Andinae (p. 84).
2.
Stems armed at or immediately below each node with one stout recurved aculeus; fls loosely spicate; n.-w. Venezuela (and offshore islands) and Caribbean Colombia B(i). ser. Distachyae (p. 67).
1.
Rs uniformly, or with a few random exceptions in any one capitulum, 4- or 3-merous.
4.
Tetramerous fls the mle.
5.
Rs spicate, the spike without filaments 3-many times longer than wide B(vi). ser. Leiocarpae (p. 119).
5.
Rs capitellate, the capitula either globose, or rarely hemispherical, or eUipsoid, but then without filaments less than twice longer than wide.
6.
Stipules foliaceous, ovate or suborbicular 7-17 mm diam., striately many-nerved; pinnae 1-jug.; s.-e. Bolivia (monotypic) B(xviii). ser. Auriculatae (p. 254).
6.
Stipules various, but never amply foliaceous and, where more than 5-nerved, the pinnae 2- several-jug. 7.
Paraphyllidia at base of pinna-rachis elliptic, ovate, reniform or suborbicular, simulating diminutive lfts; no interpinnal spicules; extratropical and closely adj. intertropical e. S. America, and 1 sp. on e. slope of Bolivian Andes B(xvii). ser. Stipellares (p. 234).
7.
Paraphyllidia, when present, subulate or setiform; spicules often but not universally present, but present if any paraphyllidia incipiently dilated.
8.
Xeromorphic drought-deciduous shmbs and small trees of warm-temperate Argentina, s.-e. Bolivia and Paraguay, with many or all peduncles arising with fasciculate, either coeval or hysteranthous lvs from brachyblasts; pinnae commonly 1-jug., in one sp. 1- 3-jug., but the larger lfts then less than 2 mm long. 9.
Homotinous branches at and after anthesis normally foliate, and lfts of longer pinnae 4-12-jug B(xii). ser. Farinosae (p. 190).
9.
Homotinous branches remotely and transiently foliate in spring, the lvs quickly caducous, and the lfts only 3-4-jug B(xiii). ser. Ephedroideae (p. 194).
8.
Various in habit, but if both sympatric and fruticose, the peduncles not arising from brachyblasts, either all axillary to a primary If or simply pseudoracemose, or pseudoracemose-paniculate.
10.
Stems, lf-stks and inflorescence without gland-tipped setulae or sessile glands (but granular, non-secretory trichomes prevalent).
11.
Shmbs and trees, at maturity 2-8 m, commonly armed on infrastipular or infrapetiolar ribs close to or below most nodes with 1-3 aculei, seldom with scattered or serial aculei, but then emphatically shrubby-arborescent.
12.
Of local dispersal at 800-2300 m in the Andes of s. Ecuador and immediately adj. Peru; lfts of longer pinnae 6-10-jug, strongly bicolored, glabrous lustrous above and pallidly silky-pilosulous beneath, the margin revolute 91.
M. caduca (p. 173).
12.
Distantly aUopatric, or lfts quite otherwise in number, coloration, or both.
B(vii). ser. Bimucronatae (p. 160).
11.
Herbs and subshmbs less than 2 m, only weakly fmticose basally if at aU, the stems either aculeate or not, but if aculeate emphatically not shmbby-arborescent 119.
M. echinocaula (p. 196) and B(xv). ser. Paucifoliatae (p. 197).
10.
Stems, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence charged with gland-tipped setulae or sessile excretory (obvious viscid) glands.
13.
Capitula hemispherical and corolla 4.5-5.5 mm long; Bahia, BrazU 93.
M. (Bimucronatae) lewisii (p. 169).
13.
Capitula globose or plumply eUipsoid and corolla at most 4 mm long; widespread.
14.
Stipules striately 8-15-nerved; fls ±4 mm long; local in e. Bolivia; see in sect. Habbasia: 294.
M. josephina (p. 483).
14.
Stipules 1-nerved; fls at most 3 mm; widespread B(xvi) ser. Glandulosae (p. 227).
4.
Trimerous fls the mle.
15.
Lfts craspedoneurous, the secondary nerves from midrib anastomosing with a continuous marginal nerve; shmbs and trees B(xix). ser. Caesalpiniifoliae (p. 256).
15.
Lfts normally veined, the secondary nerves from midrib, when present, expiring short of, or brochidodrome within, the margin, this almost always lacking a marginal nerve.
16.
Paraphyllidia lacking at base of each pinna-rachis; pubescence nearly always in part of gland-tipped setulae; no interpinnal spicules B(xxi). ser. Cordistipulae (p. 265).
16.
Paraphyllidia present at base of each pinna-rachis; either eglandular, or lf-stks spiculate, or both.
17.
Pinnae of all lvs exactly 1-jug.; low subshmbs or herbs of upland tropical e. Brazil n.- ward from Minas Gerais, 1 disjunct in Venezuela B(xxiii). ser. Filipedes (p. 283).
17.
Pinnae 2-plurijug.
18.
Lfts of longer pinnae 1-6-jug. and the longer blades over 1 cm; pod 1-2 cm wide, its valves separating in one piece from replum; tall sarmentose or rarely freestanding shmbs B(xx). ser. Ceratoniae (p. 258).
18.
Lfts at once more numerous and smaller; pod less than 1 cm wide, articulate when ripe; habit various.
19.
Stiflly branched shmbs and trees, at maturity 2 m and taller; aculei 1-3 per intemode; trimerous spp. of: B(vii). ser. Bimucronatae (p. 160).
19.
Weakly soft-woody shmbs and functionally herbaceous subshmbs mostly less than 2 m; stems serially armed with cat's-claw aculei.
B(xxii). ser. Campicolae (p. 280).
B(i).
Series DISTACHYAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Distachyae Barneby, ser. nov., hinc ser. Leiocarpis illinc ser. Andinis affines, a prioribus vix nisi flosculis saepissime (sed haud semper) pentameris, a posterioribus (quoad flores pentameros congruis) legumine maturo articulato, ab ambabus patria maxima ex parte mexicana et caribaea (nec austro-americana calida et andina) diversae.—Sp. typica: M. distachya CavaniUes.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Leptostachyae Bentham, 1875: 412-418, ex parte, exclus. typo.
M. XI. Spirocarpae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 145, in clave.
1928.
M. XII. Distachyae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 145, in clave.
1928.
M. XIX. Polyancistrae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 145, in clave.
1928.
M. XXXI.
Molles Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 146, in clave.
1928, ex parte, exclus.
M. ervendbergii et mexiquitensi.
Either microor macrophyllidious shrubs, many potentially arborescent, aU armed, on some or on all stems, either at the nodes or on the intemodes, with full or partial sets of two infrastipular and one infrapetiolar aculei, these inserted either at the nodes or displaced below them, the lf-stks occasionally also aculeolate dorsally.
Indumentum of fine silky hairs commonly mixed with livid granular ones, eglandular, in a few nearly or quite wanting, the pod sometimes setose.
Stipules linear-subulate, -setiform, ligulate, or narrowly ovate, mostly 1-2-, exceptionally 2- 3-nerved, or extemally nerveless.
Leaf-formula i-xxx/1-25, the Ift-number and -size ± reciprocally adjusted, the longest lfts (2)3-60 mm, all (1-)2-6-nerved from pulvinule.
Inflorescence most often a pseudoraceme of amentiform (subracemose) fl-spikes, either exserted or leaty-bracteate, the spikes sometimes (M. adenantheroides) contracted into an ellipsoid capitulum or (M. mollis) into a globose one, the spikes rarely fasciculate on brachyblasts.
Flowers prevailingly 5 (-6)-merous with random exceptions, all diplostemonous; calyx 0.3-2.9(-3.1) mm, the teeth varying from deltate-triangular to subobsolete; corolla 2.1-4.1 mm; filaments pink, lilac, white, united below ovary into a short, sometimes obscure stemonozone, exserted (3-)3.5-7.5(-8.5) mm.
Pods either sessile or stipitate, the body in profile commonly linear, straight or recurved, 25-60(-70) X 3-10(-12) mm, (4-)5-9(-ll)- seeded, the straight or shallowly constricted, smooth or randomly retro-aculeate replum less than I mm diam., the valves either coUiculate or strongly bullate over each seed, either glabrous, puberulent, granular, or tomentulose, and sometimes in addition setose directly over each seed or overall (the setae either smooth or scaberulous-plumulose), the pod of M. spirocarpa rolled into a spiral 7-10 mm diam.; dehiscence craspedial, the articles either individually dehiscent or not.—Spp. 16, primarily of middle montane and lowland s. Mexico, 1 extending s. to arid Caribbean lowlands of n. Colombia, n.-w. Venezuela, w. Cuba, and few n.-ward along both slopes of Sa.
Madre Occidental into extreme s.- w. United States.
The species of ser. Distachyae known to Bentham in 1875, about half of those known today. were dispersed within his ser. Leptostachyae into two unnamed sets, one more and one less pubescent, each of which incorporated some tetramerous, primarily or wholly South American species which seem not very closely related.
It must be admitted that there are no very cogent technical reasons for segregating discrete series from ser. Leptostachyae sensu lato, as no one criterion of universal application can be found.
Number of flower-parts can and often does vary in an individual capitulum, but the proportion of tetramerous flowers in the present ser. Distachyae is extremely low, whereas pentamerous flowers in what is here named ser. Leiocarpae are almost unknown.
Except that M. distachya extends south to the Caribbean slope in northwest South America and that the primarily South American M. schomburgkii, M. arenosa and M. tenuiflora have attained outposts of limited extent in tropical North America, the two series are allopatric.
It seems likely that they represent historically disconnected lines of differentiation.
It is surmised that the small Andean ser. Andinae, which have the silky pubescence and pentamerous flowers of many Mexican Distachyae, but difler collectively in spiculate leaf-stalks and capitulate flowers, are at least as closely akin.
The series Distachyae contains all but three North American mimosas in which the flowers are at once spicate and largely or wholly pentamerous.
These are i) spicate varieties of Af. acantholoba, distinguished by a pod with broadly elliptic, unsegmented valves; ii) M. nanchititlana, which has the indumentum and narrow valvately dehiscent pod of ser. Acanthocarpae; and iii) M. puberula, a systematicaUy ambiguous taxon (because only partially known), different from all other spicate Mexican Mimosae, other than tetramerous M. tenuiflora, by dorsally gland-sprinkled leaflets.
While the spicate flowers provide the principal signature of ser. Distachyae, the spike can be relatively short in some plants of some species, hardly twice as long as wide in forms of M. adenantheroides for example.
Conversely, the spike occurs sporadically in at least one series of each of the major sections of Mimosa that is otherwise characteristically capitulate.
That the reverse may have occurred is indicated by the tropical Mexican M. mollis, a species compatible in habit, armament, lustrous silky indumentum and stipitate craspedium with sympatric spicate Distachyae.
Finding no obvious relative of M. mollis outside ser. Distachyae, I provisionally include the species herein as a technically discordant member.
Conspectus of ser. Distachyae Mimosa * Lf-formula viii-xxx/12-25, the larger lfts 2.5-12.5 x 1.2-3.5 mm; aculei primarily infrastipular; fls spicate; tropical s. Mexico.
17. rhododactyla B. L. Robinson a. var. benthamii (Macbride) Bameby b. var. rhododactyla c. var. pringleana Bameby d. var. malacocarpa (B. L. Robinson) Bameby 18. costenya McVaugh ** Lf-formula ii-xv/4-16, the larger lfts 3-15 x 1-6 mm; aculei and inflorescence of preceding; tropical s. Mexico and n. through Sa.
Madre Occidental and Pacific lowlands to s.-w. United States.
19. luisana T. S. Brandegee 20. adenantheroides (Martens & Galeotti) Bentham 21. pauli Bameby 22. palmeri Rose 23. dysocarpa Bentham *** Lf-formula iv-xv/7-11, the larger lfts 4-8 x 1.6-4 mm; aculei primarily infrastipular; fls capitulate.
24. mollis Bentham **** Lf-formula i-vi/1-7, the larger lfts 10-60 x 5-4.5 mm; aculei primarily infrastipular; fls spicate; tropical s. and w. Mexico, n. to s. Sonora.
25. guirocobensis Gentry 26. guatemalensis (Hooker & Amott) Bentham 27. egregia Sandwith 28. spirocarpa Rose 29. xochipalensis R. Grether ***** Lf-formula ii-vii(-viii)/l-19, the larger lfts 3-27 x 2-17 mm; aculei primarily infrapetiolar; fls spicate (sub-racemose); tropical s. Mexico, 1 n.-w. into s. Arizona, 1 s.-e. to w. Caribbean lowlands.
30. polyantha Bentham 31. distachya CavaniUes a. var. distachya b. var. laxiflora (Bentham) Bameby c. var. oligocantha (DeCandoUe) Bameby d. var. chamelae Bameby 32. rosei B. L. Robinson Key to species of ser. Distachyae 1.
Corolla, and calyx except for some random cilia, glabrous.
2.
Lfts of distal pinnae l(-2)-jug 32.
M. rosei (p. 83).
2.
Lfts of distal pinnae 3-plurijug.
3.
Lfts of longer distal pinnae 3-6(-7)-jug.; western Mexican vars. of: 31.
M. distachya (p. 80).
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 7-40-jug. 4.
Pinnae of primary lvs 7-15-jug. (less numerous in some distal lvs) and the lfts of their longer pinnae 18-35-jug.; cauline aculei, when present, 1-3 per intemode, displaced below the node itself; body of pod elliptic in profile, 16-23 mm wide, the valves falling in one piece; Central American vars. of: 50.
M. acantholoba (p. 106).
4.
Pinnae of all lvs 2-7(-8)-jug. and lfts of longer pinnae mostly 7-18-jug.; cauline aculei, when present, commonly solitary infrapetiolar and inserted immediately below the node itself (rarely 1-2 additional infrastipular aculei also); body of pod linear in profile, 8-12 mm wide, articulate when ripe; Mexico (Sinaloa to Oaxaca) 30.
M polyantha (p. 79).
1.
Corolla, and almost always the calyx also, silky-pubescent overall.
5.
Lfts of longer pinnae (3-)4-25-jug. 6.
Pinnae 2^(-5)-jug. and lfts 3-7-jug. (if lfts very strongly bicolored, cf. M. adenantheroides, p. 73).
7.
Lf-stks of longer lvs 1-2.5 cm; largest lfts 2-5 x 1-1.8 mm; calyx 0.3-0.5 mm; pod 4-5 mm wide; Tehuacan Desert and vicinity, Puebla and n. Oaxaca 19.
M. luisana (p. 72).
7.
Lf-stks 2.5-12 cm; largest lfts 10-25 x 5-16 mm; calyx 1.3-2.7 mm; pod 5-9.5 mm wide; allopatric.
8.
Calyx 0.4-1.4 mm; aculei, when present, commonly solitary and infrapetiolar, either immediately below the node or variably displaced; vars. of: 31.
M. distachya (p. 80).
8.
Calyx 1.5-2.7 mm; aculei, when present, primarily infrastipular and displaced below node.
9.
Inflorescence autumnal and hibernal, the spikes pseudoracemose at end of homotinous branches and most of them exserted from foliage; If-stk spiculate between pinna-pairs; pod 5-6.5 mm wide; Sinaloa s.- and s.-e. to state of Mexico 26.
M. guatemalensis (p. 77).
9.
Inflorescence vernal from defoliate trunk, the spikes all subtended by a coeval If; spicules 0; pod 7.5-9.5 mm wide; local in s. Sonora 25.
M. guirocobensis (p. 76).
6.
Either the pinnae more than 4-jug., or lfts of longer pinnae more than 7-jug., or both.
10.
Rs crowded into subglobose capitula 24.
M. mollis (p. 76).
10.
Rs spicate or racemose, the receptacle at least (8-) 10 mm long and the spike without filaments 2-many times as long as diam. 11.
Lfts (dry) very strongly bicolored, above dark green brunnescent, pallid beneath; lfformula (iii-)iv-ix/6-12; If-stk spiculate; larger lfts commonly 7-15 mm; axis of spikes usually less than 2 cm, rarely to 6 cm; pod 6-9 mm wide 20.
M. adenantheroides (p. 73).
11.
Lfts not as above, and when lf-formula comparable then pod narrower.
12.
Either the pinnae of longer lvs 3-9-jug., or lfts of longer pinnae 3-11-jug., or both, and the lfts in tropical latitudes less than 8-jug. 13.
Pinnae of larger lvs 6-15-jug., but lfts only 6-11 -jug.; calyx 0.5-1.3 mm; larger lfts 3-5.5 X 1.3 mm; foothills and coastal plain in Sonora and Sinaloa 22.
M. palmeri (p. 74).
13.
Pinnae 3-9-jug.; calyx 1.5-3 mm; uplands from Durango n.-e. on both slopes of Sa.
Madre to s. Arizona and trans-Pecos Texas.
14.
Branched subshmbs 1 m or less; If-outline proportionately narrow, the rachis of longer pinnae ± 1-2.5 cm; dispersal as given above 23.
M. dysocarpa (p. 75).
14.
Virgate monopodial shmbs to 2 m; If-outline proportionately broad, the rachis of longer pinnae 3-7.5 cm; local in s.-w. Chihuahua 21.
M. pauli (p. 73).
12.
Pinnae of longer lvs 8-30-jug. and lfts of longer pinnae 12-25-jug.; tropical Mexico on the Pacific slope, from Nayarit to Oaxaca.
15.
Stipules nerveless extemally or 1-nerved at base only; longer lfts 2.5-7. x 1.2- 3.5 mm, 2-A times as long as wide; pod 5-7 mm wide, either setaculeate or not so, but setae or setaculei, if present, smooth; range as given 17.
M rhododactyla (p. 70).
15.
Stipules 3-4-nerved; longer lfts 6-12.5 x 1.3-2.4 mm, 4.5-5.2 times as long as wide; pod 3.5-4.5 mm wide, densely hispid with scabrous setae; lowland s.- w. Nayarit and adj. Jahsco 18.
M. costenya (p. 71).
Lfts of longer pinnae 1-3-jug. 16.
Foliage silky-pilosulous overaU; either pinnae of larger lvs or lfts of distal pinnae 2-3-jug. 17.
Lf-formula ii-iii/1-2; larger lfts 30-60 x 20-45 mm; fmit a normal craspedium, straight or gently curved; s.-w. Mexico and Guerrero 27.
M. egregia (p. 78).
17.
Lf-formula iii-vi/2-3; larger lfts 13-28 x 5-12 mm; fmit a craspedium coiled on itself through 1-1.5 tums into a spiral to ± 10 mm diam.; centr. and s. Sinaloa, perhaps also in w. Michoacan 28.
M spirocarpa (p. 78).
16.
FoUage glabrous; both pinnae and lfts of almost all pinnae exactly 1-jug.; centr. Guerrero. ... 29.
Af. xochipalensis (p. 79).
17.
Mimosa rhododactyla B. L. Robinson, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist. 31: 260.
1904.-Typus infra sub var. rhododactyla indicatur.
Amply foliate arborescent shrubs at anthesis 2-7 m, armed on most intemodes with a pair of infrastipular, horizontal or gently decurved aculei 2-8 mm and often one (variably displaced) infrapetiolar one but random branchlets unarmed, the young stems, foliage and inflorescence silky-pilosulous or -tomentulose with fine loose lustrous hairs less than 0.4 mm, the lfts bicolored, darker green, livid-brown or gray above, paler beneath, the efoliate or proximally leaf-bracteate pseudoracemes of geminate or fasciculate, densely flowered spikes 1-3 dm above foliage.
Stipules lanceolate or linear-attenuate 3 - 10 mm, dorsally nerveless or l(-2)-nerved at base only, becoming dry fragile.
Lf-formula viii-xxx/ 12-25, the lf-stks (5-)6-16 cm, commonly aculeolate on back or sides, the pinnae mostly subalternate, the ventral sulcus continuous; rachis of longer pinnae 2-6 cm; lfts obliquely ovate, oblong-eUiptic or lanceolate, abruptly apiculate, the longer ones 2.5-7 x 1.2-3.5 mm, 2-4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, the dorsally prominulous midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2-3, a short posterior nerve often prominulous but further venulation either imperceptible or weakly discolored.
Flower spikes 2-6 per node. without filaments (3.5-)4-6 mm diam., the axis 2.5-11 cm, the bracts usually minute cauducous, in var. pringleana oblanceolate and to 2.5 mm, the obovoid fl-buds canescently sericeous; flowers (4-)5(-6)-merous diplostemonous; calyx campanulate or turbinate-campanulate 0.4-1.7 mm, the often unequal, depressed-deltate or partly fused teeth 0.1-0.25 mm, the tube either silky-canescent or glabrate, pinkish; corolla turbinate-campanulate 1.7-3.3 mm, silky overall, the spreading-erect 1-nerved lobes 0.8-1.1 mm; filaments pink, united into a stemonozone less than 0.4 mm, exserted 3-6 mm.
Pods sessile, in profile linear and either gently or strongly curved, including terminal cusp 40-70 x 5-7 mm, mostly 6-11-seeded, the shallowly undulate replum either unarmed or randomly armed with 1 or (var. pringleana) several ranks of erect aculei 1- 5 mm, the stiflfly papery valves bullate over each seed, either a) densely lanate-tomentulose and granular, or b) in addition thinly setaculeate over each seed, or c) densely echinate-aculeate overall, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 6-8.5 mm long. A polymorphic species of thom-forest and open oak-pine woodland between 500 and 2300 m in w. and s.-w. Mexico, most highly developed s. of the Transverse Volcanic Range w.-ward from n. Oaxaca, but extending n. to Sa.
Sumtato in centr. Sinaloa and inland to the middle LermaSantiago basin.
Key to varieties of M. rhododactyla Calyx 1.1-1.7 mm, ± half as long as corolla, always densely tomentulose extemally; rachis of longer pinnae 4-6 cm; lfts ovate; middle Balsas Basin (s.-w. Mexico, adj. Guerrero, and Michoacan w.-ward to Coalcoman), described (perhaps mistakenly) from Guanajuato 17a. var. benthamii (p. 71).
Calyx 0.4-1 mm, scarcely one third as long as corolla, either tomentulose or glabrescent extemally; rachis of longer pinnae 2-4.5 cm; lfts various.
2.
Lfts obliquely ovate, 1.7-2.7 times as long as wide.
3.
Pinnae to 10-jug.; lfts glabrous above, s. Balsas Basin in Guerrero. ... 17b. var. rhododactyla (p. 71).
3.
Pinnae 16-26-jug.; lfts at least puberulent above; middle Lerma-Santiago Basin in Jalisco, n. through s. Zacatecas and s. Durango to Sa.
Sumtato in Sinaloa 17c. var. pringleana (p. 71).
2.
Lfts lanceolate, 3-4 times as long as wide; e. end ofBalsas Basin in Puebla, Morelos and adj. Guerrero, e. into n. Oaxaca 17d. var. malacocarpa (p. 71).
17a. Mimosa rhododactyla B. L. Robinson var. benthamii (Macbride) Bameby, comb, nov., based on autonym generated by M. benthamii var. malacocarpa Macbride, 1919, q.v. infra. M. benthamii Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 12.
1919, a legitimate substitute for M. fasciculata (Kunth) Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 88.
1846 nom. illeg., based on Acacia fasciculata Kunth, Mimoses 75, t. 23.
1841 non Mimosa fasciculata Poiret, 1810. — "prope Guanaxuato Mexicanorum, alt. 1070 hex."
— Holotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland s.n.,
P-HBK!—The locality data may be incorrect, similar plants being known from modem collections only from s. of the Transverse Volcanic range.
Mimosa sp. M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 34(3): 280.
1903 (Langlasse 19, F! G!).
17b. Mimosa rhododactyla B. L. Robinson var. rhododactyla.
M. rhododactyla B. L. Robinson, 1904, I.e.—"at Las Higueritas near the boundary between Michoacan and Guerrero [between Arteaga and El Infemillo, Guerrero] .
. .alt.
500m, 11 July, IS9S,E. Langlasse.''- Holotypus, Langlasse 230, GH!; isotypi, F! = NY Neg. 11905, G! NY (fragm)! M. puberula sensu M. Micheli, 1903: 279; non Bentham.
17c. Mimosa rhododactyla B. L. Robinson var. pringleana Bameby, var. nov., cum var. rhododactyla calyce parvulo coroUae saltem triplo breviori congruens, sed pinnis magis numerosis 16-26 (nec 10)-jugis usque, foliolisque supra puberuUs diversa.-Mexico.
Jalisco: hills near Guadalajara, 20.
VII (fl), 2.
XI (fr), 1893, C G. Pringle^^59. —Syntypi, mounted on one sheet, NY.
M. benthamii sensu McVaugh, 1987: 205, max. ex parte.
Resembling var. rhododactyla in small calyx (^3 or less as long as corolla) but differing in more numerous pinnae (as given above) and leaflets puberulent on upper face.
Genuine var. benthamii has proportionately much longer calyx and pinnae on the average longer.
Dispersed from centr. Jalisco n. and n.-w. into s. Zacatecas (/. & C. Taylor 6095, NY), Durango (Rose 22635, NY) and Sinaloa (Breedlove 18026, RSA).
17d. Mimosa rhododactyla B. L. Robinson var. malacocarpa (B. L. Robinson) Bameby, comb, nov. M. fasciculata var. malacocarpa B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 319.
1898.-"Collected by E. W. Nelson, between Amolac, Puebla, and Sochi, Guerrero, altitude 1200 to 1260 m, 28 November, 1894, no. 2023, and by /.
A^.
Rose, at Bolafios, Jalisco .
.
. no. 2917."-Lectotypus, Nelson 1917, GH!; clastotypus, NY!; the syntypus (Rose 2917) is referred to var. pringleana. —M. benthamii var. malacocarpa (B. L. Robinson) Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 12.
1919.
M. malacocarpa (B. L. Robinson) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 158.
1928.
18.
Mimosa costenya McVaugh, Fl. novo-galic.
5: 207, fig. 27.
1987.-".
.
.
Pitillal, NE of Puerto Vallarta [Jalisco] .
.
. (.
.
.
Rzedowski 17800, the holotype)."-Holotypus, MICH! = NY Neg. 12364; paratypi, Feddema 1123, 2601, McVaugh 19085, aU MICH! Amply microphyllidious arborescent shrub attaining 5-6 m, armed on random intemodes of subterete green homotinous branches with solitary, distantly displaced, straight horizontal infrapetiolar aculei ±3-8 x 3-8 mm, the young branches and foliage thinly finely silky-pubemlent with ascending yeUowish hairs to 0.3-0.8 mm and microscopically granular, the foliage bicolored, the lfts bright green and either glabrous or puberulent on upper face, beneath paler and always pubescent, the mostly unarmed inflorescence an ample, at first exserted, early foliate panicle of loose-fld spikes.
Stipules reflexed and distally incurved, lanceolate or oblong-ovate 3.5- 7 X 1.2-2 mm, early pallid and papery, deciduous, dorsally 3-4-nerved, silky-puberulent on both faces.
Leaf-formula viii-xii/17-25; lf-stks of longer lvs 9-13.5 cm, the petiole ±2^.5 cm, the longer interpinnal segments 8-14 mm, the ventral sulcus continuous (spicules 0); rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-5.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments ±1-2.5 mm; lfts a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the blades narrowly lanceolate from obtusangulate base, straight except for upturned, sharply acute tip, those near mid-rachis 6-12.5 X 1.3-2.4 mm, 4.5-5.2 times as long as wide, all 2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the slender, forwardly displaced midrib dividing blade 1:2-3, prominulous only dorsally, the posterior nerve(s) short and weak.
Flower-spikes (1-)2-5 per node, the axes including short peduncle 5-9 cm, the submembranous linear-oblanceolate bracts 0.7-1.1 mm, caducous before anthesis; flowers subsessile, 5-merous 10-androus, all bisexual, thinly silky-pubescent extemally overall; calyx campanulate 1.3-1.6 mm, the deltate or broad-triangular, sometimes unequal teeth 0.2- 0.4 mm; corolla 2.7-3 mm, the lance-ovate, faintly 1-nerved lobes ±1.3 x 0.7 mm, suberect at anthesis, pallid in age; filaments pink fading whitish, free almost to very base, exserted 4.5- 5.5 mm.
Pods scattered along spike-axis, sessile, in profile linear, straight or gently decurved, ±17- 23 X 3.5-4.5 mm, the nearly straight replum 0.45-0.6 mm wide, the papery valves buUately elevated over the whole of each article, the replum and valves alike at once densely puberulent and livid-granular and softly hispid with slender erect, reddish-brown, distally scaberulous, subterete setae to 2-3 mm, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling biconvex indehiscent articles 2.5-3 mm long; ^^e-^^ biconvex ±2.5 mm diam., the testa lustrous brown, the small pleurogram centric.
On hillsides and in pastures below 600 m, in the subdeciduous forest belt of the Pacific coastal lowlands and lower foothills, becoming weedy in disturbed places, locally plentiful but of localized occurrence in far s. Nayarit and immediately adj. Jalisco, Mexico (lat. 20°40'-21°20'N).-n. IX- 'K. — Costeha.
19.
Mimosa luisana T. S. Brandegee, Zoe 5: 248.
1908.—"in arroyos near San Luis [Tultitlanapa], Puebla (Aug. 1907)."-Holotypus, C. A. Purpus 2647, UC: isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54770, NY! Widely branched shrubs apparently related to M. rhododactyla but microphyllous, attaining 3 m and of equal spread, randomly armed on infrapetiolar rib well below the node with solitary, horizontal or subdecurved aculei 2-4 mm (often appearing opposed to a If or brachyblast), the young stems and foliage silky-pilosulous with fine loose lustrous hairs to 0.3-0.4 mm and minutely livid-granular, the pale green lfts subconcolorous, the solitary and 2-3-nate fl-spikes pseudoracemose on coevally developing branchlets, the proximal ones subtended by diminished lvs, the lvs of annotinous branchlets fasciculate on brachyblasts.
Stipules associated with primary lvs linear-attenuate 2-4 mm, pilose-tomentulose dorsally, those of brachyblasts shorter.
Leaf-formula ii-iv/4-5, the lf-stks 10-25 mm, the ventral sulcus continuous, the rachis of longer pinnae 4- 11 mm; lfts oblong-elUptic obtuse, the longer ones 2-4.7 X 1-1.8 mm, 2-2.8 times as long as wide, all faintly 1 -nerved dorsally by the scarcely displaced midrib.
Flower-spikes without filaments 4.5-5 mm diam., the peduncle 10-24 mm, the receptacular axis ±2-3 cm, the small bracts early caducous; flowers sessile, either 4- or 5-merous diplostemonous, silky-strigulose overall; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.3-0.5 mm, minutely toothed; corolla turbinate-campanulate constricted into a short basal neck, 2.5-2.7 mm, the ovate erect 1-nerved lobes ±1 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous under the pubescent ovary, exserted 5-6.5 mm.
Pods ±2-6 per spike, sessile, in profile falcately linear, including slender terminal cusp 30-45 X 4.5 mm, 5-8-seeded, the stout replum very shaUowly constricted, unarmed, the firmly papery valves bullate over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely pilosulous-tomentulose and granular overaU, the valves breaking up into free-falling, strongly biconvex articles 4-5 mm long. In xeromorphic mattoral, on limestone substrates near 1600 m, known only from Tehuacan Desert, in s. Puebla and adj. Oaxaca, Mexico.— ¥1.
V-VII. 20.
Mimosa adenantheroides (Martens & Galeotti) Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 88.
1846.
Acacia adenantheroides Martens & Galeotti, BuU.
Acad. Roy.
Sci. Bmxelles 10(9): 312 (=Enum. pi. Galeotti 10: 11).
1843.-"dans les montagnes calcaires et gneissiques de Sola et de Yolotepeque (cordillere au Sud d'Oaxaca), de 700 a 7500 pieds."
-Holotypus, BR; isotypus, K! = NY photo s.n.
! Acacia cylindriflora Martens & Galeotti, Bull. Acad. Roy.
Sci. Bruxelles 10(9): 311 (=Enum. pi. Galeotti 10: 12.) 1843.-"No.
3207 . .. dans les ravins de Don Dominguillo, pres d'Oaxaca, a 2,500 pieds."
— Holotypus (Rudd, 1982: 138,fig.2), BR! photo s.n.,
US!—Equated with the preceding by Grether, 1987: 310.
Mimosa remota Bentham, London J. Bot. 5:88.1846.— "Mexico, Galeotti, n. 3240."—Holotypus not found at K in 1984-1986.—Equated with M. adenantheroides by Grether, 1987: 310.
M. polyancistra Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 422.
1875.-"New Spain, Pavon "-Holotypus, G-Boiss.
!; phototypus, K!; clastotypus (fragm), misit Hochreutiner, 1926, NY!—Equated with M. adenantheroides by Grether, 1987: 310.
M. hystricosa T. S. Brandegee, Univ. Calif Publ. Bot. 4(3): 86.
1910.—"Collected on Cerro Gavilan and Cerro de la Yerba [Puebla, C. A. Purpusl No. 4242."
- Holotypus, UC 1368031; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54764, NY!—Equated with M. polyancistra by Britton & Rose, 1928: 163.
M. gomezii Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 159.
1928.—"Type from Valley ofOaxaca, September 20, 1894, [E. W.] Nelson 1479."-Holotypus, US!; clastotypus (fragm), NY!—Equated with M. adenantheroides by Grether, 1987: 310.
Amply foliate, arborescent shrubs attaining 1- 4(-5) m, armed on intemodes and on some lfstks with straight declined aculei 1-4.5 mm, or the lf-stks with recurved cat's-claw ones, except for sometimes facially glabrous lfts minutely and often densely puberulent overall and livid-granular, the lfts strikingly bicolored, thin-textured, when dry dark green or dark brown above, pallid beneath, the inflorescence a leafy-bracteate or sometimes distally efoliate pseudoraceme of oblong-ellipsoid, spiciform (subracemose), cyhndric, or even amentiform capitula.
Stipules lanceolate, linear-setiform or -oblong 2-8 mm, 1- 2-nerved, often lanulose extemally, becoming papery.
Leaf-formula (ii-)iii-vi(-ix)/6-12, the lfstks 3-12(-16) cm, the ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs and there with a spicule 0.6- 3 mm; rachis of lon%er pinnae (1-)2-6.5(-l) cm; lfts oblong or ovate-elliptic (the distal pair sometimes obovate), usually obtuse-mucronulate but sometimes apiculate, the larger ones 6.5-15 x 3-6 mm, 2-3(-3.7) times as long as wide, all slenderly 3-4-nerved dorsally, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the inner posterior nerve brochidodrome well above mid-blade.
Peduncles 1-4 per node, 1-3.5 cm; spikes relatively loose or early becoming so, without filaments 6.5-7.5 mm diam., the axis at full anthesis commonly 8-20 mm, exceptionally (in Sinaloa) to 6 cm, the pyriform fl-buds densely puberulent or silky-pilosulous, much longer than the small caducous bracts; pedicels 0-0.4 mm; flowers 5-merous 10-androus, all or almost all bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 1.2-2.1 mm, the often unequal, deltate or depressed-deltate teeth 0.2-0.5 mm; corolla pinkish, narrowly vaseshaped 2.6-3.7 mm, the lobes shorter than tube, erect or in age arched outward; filaments whitish or pale pink, monadelphous through 0.2-0.5 mm below the puberulent ovary, exserted 5-7 mm.
Pods to 10 per capitulum, in profile undulately linear, straight or gently decurved, when well fertilized 40-60 X 6-9 mm, 5-8-seeded, contracted at base into a stipelike neck ±3 mm, cuspidate at apex, the replum armed either distantly randomly or all around with gently recurved aculei 0.5-2 mm, the replum and valves alike densely puberulent and livid-granular overall, the papery valves low-bullate over the basipetal seeds, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles ± 6-8 mm long. In pine-oak and tropical montane deciduous woodland, 1460-2400 m, discontinuously widespread in w. and s. Mexico, from Sinaloa (Sa.
Sumtato) to Jalisco, e. and s.-e. to centr. Veracruz, Oaxaca, and Chiapas. —Fl. (V-)VI-XI (-XII).
21.
Mimosa pauli Bameby, nom. nov. M. callithrix Standley, Publ. Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 22: 27.
1940; non Malme, 1931.- "Mexico: Sierra Charuco, Rio Fuerte, Chihuahua, along stream banks in a canyon, alt. 1,500 meters, July 23, 1935, Howard Scott Gentry 1531 "-Holotypus, F 9156021 = F Neg. 54787 = NY Neg. 11899.
M. callithrix sensu Gentry, Publ. Carnegie Inst.
Wash. 527: 127.
1942.
Slender single-stemmed shrubs ±2 m with 2- 3 prominently ribbed, pliantly spreading-ascending branches, either unarmed or armed on young stem and on dorsal and lateral ribs of lfstks with scattered recurved, stramineous browntipped aculei 0.5-2 mm, the homotinous branchlets and foliage finely thinly silky-strigulose overall, the lfts bicolored, olivaceous above, pallid beneath, the loose fl-spikes axillary to distal lvs and shorter than them.
Stipules firm, linear-attenuate subinvolute 3-11 x 0.5-0.9 mm, persistent.
Leaf-formula iv-viii/(9-)ll-16; longer lf-stks 7.5-15 cm, the petiole with pulvinus 1- 3.5 cm, the longer interpinnal segments of If-stk 1-2.8 cm, the ventral sulcus either continuous or bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae distally accrescent, the rachis of longer ones 3-7.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2.7-5 mm; lfts decrescent at each end of rachis, in outline narrowly oblong from deeply semicordate base, deltately acuminulate, those near mid-rachis 7-12.5 x 2-3.7(-^.4) mm, 3-3.6 times as long as wide, all weakly 3-nerved from pulvinule, the displaced midrib dividing blade 1:2- 5, the inner posterior nerve produced usually almost to blade's apex, the outer one very short, the venation all immersed above, sometimes bluntly prominulous beneath, a faint secondary venulation sometimes perceptible.
Flower-spikes without filaments 7-8 mm diam., the peduncle and axis together 4.5-9.5 cm, the linear bracts caducous, the pedicels either stout 0.25 mm or obsolete; flowers 5-merous 10-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 1.5- 1.9 mm, densely silky-pilosulous, the depresseddeltate teeth ±0.4 mm; corolla turbinate-campanulate 3.1-3.5 mm, densely silky-pilosulous extemally, the erect ovate 3-nerved lobes ±1.5 X 0.7 mm; filaments purple, free almost to base, exserted ± 5 mm.
Pods scattered along racemeaxis, in profile narrowly linear, almost straight, long-attenuate at each end but not truly stipitate, overaU 35-50 x 3 mm, 5-8-seeded, the shallowly undulate unarmed replum 0.35-0.6 mm wide, the papery valves buUately distended over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely minutely pilosulous and remotely livid-granular, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling, ellipsoid, individually dehiscent articles 4.5-6.5 mm long, the basipetal seeds ± 3 x 1.8 mm, their testa lustrous brown.
On banks and bed of intermittent streams in pine-forest, near 1200-1500 m, known only from canyons of rios Fuerte and Urique on the w. slope of Sa.
Madre Occidental in lat. 27°-28°N, s.-w. Chihuahua (Mojarachic, Cerocahui, Sa.
Chamc o ) . - n VII-IX; fr IX-? Mimosa pauli has much in common with M. palmeri, but differs in habit, ecology, and in the morphological characters listed in the serial key.
The new epithet refers to Paul Carpenter Standley (1884-1963), who first described the species.
22.
Mimosa palmeri Rose, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 1: 99.
1891.-"Near Alamos [Sonora, Mexico].
September 16 to 30 [ 1890]. [E. Palmer] No. 628."-Holotypus, US!; isotypus, NY! M. coelocarpa B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 319.
1898.-"Collected at Topolobampo, Sinaloa, Mexico, by Dr. Edward Palmer, 15-25 September, 1897, no. 187."-Holotypus, GH (not seen); isotypi, US! NY (fragm)! Amply microphyllidious arborescent shrubs attaining 7 m but often smaller, randomly armed at or close below some nodes with (1-)2 stout, straight or recurved infrastipular aculei 2-7 mm occasionally accompanied by one, more distantly displaced infrapetiolar one, the young stems and foliage thinly silky-puberulent overall, the bicolored lfts above dove-gray or livid-glaucescent, pallid beneath, the lax fl-spikes pseudoracemose at end of primary and some secondary homotinous branches, well exserted from foliage.
Stipules linear-attenuate or soft-setiform, 2-6 mm, 1 -nerved.
Leaf-formula of primary lvs vi-xiii(-xv)/6-l 1, the longer lf-stks 5-15 cm, the pinnae often not exactly opposite, the ventral sulcus continous (spicules 0); rachis of longer pinnae 10-33 mm, the lfts often weU spaced along it; lfts ovate-elliptic or narrowly oblong apiculate, the longer ones 3-5.5 x 1.3-1.5 mm, 1.9- 3.6 times as long as wide, on dorsal face faintly 2-nerved, the moderately displaced midrib either simple or weakly 1-2-branched.
Flower-spikes 1-3 per node, without filaments 4.5-6 mm diam., the axis including peduncle 4-9 cm, the minute bracts caducous, the plumply obovoid fl-buds gray-silky; flowers sessile or almost so (pedicel to 0.2 mm), 5-merous 10-androus, all bisexual. fragrant; calyx membranous, campanulate or turbinate-campanulate 0.5-1.3 mm, the depressed-deltate ciliolate teeth 0.1-0.2 mm; coroUa funnelform 2.1-3 mm, the erect, extemally sericeous lobes 1.1-1.3 mm; filaments pink, united at very base into an obscure stemonozone, exserted 4-5.5 mm.
Pods several per spike, sessile, in profile undulately linear, including long terminal cusp 35-45 x 3 mm, 6-8-seeded, the stout replum shallowly constricted between seeds, the stiffly papery valves buUately elevated over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely silky-pilosulous and livid-granular overall, the valves breaking up when ripe into oblong-eUiptic free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 4- 5.5 mm long. In thom-forest below 800 m, on plains and in foothill canyons of Sonora s.-ward from ±27°30'N, s. into Sinaloa where barely crossing the tropic line near Mazatlan, Mexico.—Fl.
VIIIXI, and following rains.
Gentry (Rio Mayo PI.
128.1942) has described the habit and habitats of M. palmeri, a species distinguished by elaborately microphyUidious leaves and slender flower-spikes.
I have some misgivings about the synonymy.
Mimosa coelocarpa was found on the coastal plain, rather than in the sierra foothills, and has proportionately narrower leaflets than typical M. palmeri, and a more deeply campanulate calyx (1.2-1.3, not 0.5-0.8 mm).
The observed differences seem to fall short of the specific.
23.
Mimosa dysocarpa Bentham in A. Gray, PI.
Wright.
1:62.1852.-"[C. Wright] 163.
Mountain valleys in the Pass of the Limpia and beyond, August, in fruit.
Also in the collection of 1851, in flower."
-Isotypi, GH! NY! (holotypus to be sought at K).
M. wrightii A. Gray, PI. wright.
2: 52.
1853.-"Hillsides on the Sonoita, Sonora; Sept. ([C Wright] 1041.)"-Holotypus, GH!; isotypus, NY!-M dysocarpa var. wrightii (A. Gray) Keamey & Peebles, J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 29: 482.
1939.
M. dysocarpa sensu Bentham, 1875: 414, pi. 66 (pod); Britton & Rose, 1928: 159; Isely, 1973: 103, map 30.
M. wrightii sensu Bentham, 1875:417; Britton & Rose, 1928, I.e.; M. dysocarpa var. wrightii sensu Isely, 1973, I.e., map 30.
Diffusely ascending or sometimes depressed shrubs and subshrubs attaining 4-9 dm, armed on some or all intemodes with sets of usually 3 (1 infrapetiolar and 2 infrastipular), horizontal or subdeclined, broad-based aculei 2-10 mm (rarely mixed with scattered aculeoli), the new stems and foliage silky-pilosulous overall with fine shining hairs, the lfts bicolored, pale green beneath, above dove-gray and only thinly pilosulous or glabrous, the fl-spikes either all axillary to coeval or immediately hysteranthous lvs or some pseudo-racemose along extending homotinous axes.
Stipules linear-attenuate or softly setiform (2-)3-8(-ll) mm, obscurely 1-nerved.
Leaf-formula (iv-)v-xi/(6-)8-13(-14), the expanded If-blade notably narrow in proportion to length; lf-stks (2.5-)3-8(-l 3) cm, commonly randomly aculeate, the narrow sulcus either continuous or in some lvs bridged and spiculate; rachis of longer pinnae (8-) 10-24 mm; lfts lanceolate or lance-oblong 3-8 x (0.6-)0.8-2.2 mm, acute or deltately apiculate, faintly or almost imperceptibly (1-)2-nerved dorsally, the simple midrib moderately displaced.
Peduncles 1-2 per node, 5-26 mm; spikes either compact or moderately loose, without filaments 5-9 mm diam., the receptacular axis (1-) 1.5-5.5 cm, the plumply obovoid fl-buds longer than the linear caducous hr2iCts;flowers sessile, silky-pilosulous overall, 4- 5-merous 8-10-androus, all bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate (1.2-) 1.6-2.9(-3.1) mm, the tube weakly 4-5-ribbed, the deltate or triangular teeth 0.15-0.6(-0.7) mm; corolla (2.6-)2.8-4.1 mm, the ascending lobes 1.1-1.6 mm; filaments pink fading whitish, monadelphous through 0.2-0.5 mm below the substipitate, densely puberulent ovary, exserted 6-8.5 mm.
Pods to 10 per spike, sessile or almost so, in profile undulately linear, straight or gently decurved, including the terminal cusp 30-60 x (3-)4-6(-7) mm, 4-8(-9)-seeded, densely pilosulous-tomentulose overall, the shallowly constricted replum either unarmed or randomly armed with compressed aculei 1-4 mm, the stiff"- ly papery valves buUately distended and sometimes setulose over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 4-8 mm long. In desert grassland and open oak-woodland, 1300-1950 m, Sa.
Madre Occidental from s.-e. Arizona and s.-w. New Mexico s.-ward on the Pacific slope to the valley of rio Sonora near 29°N and on the Plateau slope to upper rio Nazas in n. Durango near 26°N, e. to mountainous transPecos T e x a s . - n .
VI-IX(-X).
The craspedia of M. dysocarpa west of the continental divide tend to be a trifle narrower and to have a more slender replum than those of plants found in Texas and Chihuahua, but in southwestern New Mexico and southeastern Arizona the variation is continuous.
Correlation between characters of pubescence, fruit, and size, curvature or color of cauline prickles, analyzed by Isely (1971b: 417), is low.
24.
Mimosa mollis Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 408.
1842.-"Mexico (Acatlan [Puebla]), Andrieux, n. 400."—Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)! M. herincquiana M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 34(3): 276, t. 21.
1903.-"Cariote [Canada] del Zopilote [Guerrero], 1000 m . .. May 1899."-Holotypus, Langlasse 1040, G!; isotypi, F! NY (fragm)! — Equated with the preceding by Grether, 1987: 317.
Amply foliate, potentially arborescent shrubs attaining 5 m but often smaller, the branches either unarmed or armed at or close below some nodes with sets of (1-)2 infrastipular, scarcely or greatly dilated aculei 0.5-0.6 mm accompanied or not by an infrapetiolar one, the epidermis of annotinous stems exfoliating in pallid fibers, the young stems and foliage softly silky-pilosulous overall, the lfts bicolored, rich green (brunnescent) above, pallid beneath, the globose capitula solitary or 2-5 together mostly in the axil of coeval or immediately hysteranthous lvs of lateral branches, sometimes pseudoracemose in earliest anthesis.
Stipules lanceolate or ligulate 2-6 mm, the blades becoming papery fragile, often lanate dorsaUy.
Leaf-formula (ii-)iv-xv/7-l 1, the lf-stks (3.5-)4-14 cm, the ventral groove continuous (spicules 0); pinnae often not exactly opposite, the rachis of longer ones (12-) 15-47 mm; lfts oblongor ovate-elliptic, abruptly apiculate, the longer ones (4-)5-8 x (1.6-)2-3.8 mm, all weakly 2-3-nerved dorsally, the simple midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the posterior nerve expiring near mid-blade.
Peduncles (2-)2.5-4.5 cm; capitula without filaments 7-9 mm diam., moriform, the subglobose fl-buds silky-pilosulous; yZow^r^ 5-merous 10-androus, all bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.5-1 mm, the irregularly denticulate rim silky-ciliolate; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 3-4.5 mm, constricted at base into a neck ± as long as calyx, the ascending lobes 0.8-1.5 mm; filaments pink, fading whitish, monadelphous into a stemonozone 0.25-0.7 mm, exserted 5.5-7.5 mm; ovary and forming pod densely tomentulose.
Pods sessile, in profile falcately linear, the body 60-70 x 5 mm, ±8- seeded, contracted at apex into a cusp nearly 2 mm, the replum ±1.5 mm wide, little or not constricted between seeds, the firm valves elevated over each seed in the form of a laterally flattened crest 2-2.5 mm taU, the valves and replum alike densely brownish-tomentulose overall, the valves disarticulating when ripe.
In thom-forest and deciduous tropical bmshwoodland, (660-)850-2000(-2250) m, locally plentiful about the e. end of the Balsas Depression in e. Guerrero, Puebla, and n. Oaxaca, Mexico.-Fl. (V-)VI-IX. 25.
Mimosa guirocobensis Gentry, Publ. Carnegie Inst.
Wash. 527 (Rio Mayo pi.): 127.
1942.-"Type (5956) in Shreve Herbarium, Tucson, Arizona, collected near Guirocoba, southeastern Sonora, Mexico, April 6, 1940, by Howard Scott Gentry."
-Holotypus not seen; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54792, MICH! = MICH Neg. 5956, NY!; paratypus.
Gentry 3020 from Jecopaco, F! Drought-deciduous few-branched shrubs 1-2 m flowering in spring from defoliate gray sticklike, strongly ribbed annotinous trunk or branches, randomly armed on some intemodes and on dorsal rib of some lf-stks with scattered erect aculei 1-2.5 mm, the stems, foliage and inflorescence densely silky-pilosulous throughout with fine loose, gray or yellowish hairs less than 1 mm, the dense cylindric fl-spikes borne on newly developing branchlets and subtended by coetaneous or hysteranthous lvs.
Stipules erect, linear or linear-ligulate obtuse 3-15 x 0.4-1.2 mm, subinvolute, tardily deciduous.
Lf-formula ii-iv/5- 7; lf-stks of developing lvs (mature summer foliage not seen) to 8-12 cm, the stout petiole 1.5- 4 cm, the interpinnal segments mostly a little shorter, the ventral sulcus concealed by pubescence, spicules 0; rachis of longer pinnae 1-9 cm, the deflexed paraphyllidia 0.6-3 mm; lfts obliquely ovate or lance-ovate, either obtuse mucronulate or deltately subacute, the larger attaining 10-27 X 5-10(-16) mm, aU 3-6-nerved from pulvinule, the slightly displaced midrib pinnately branched from below middle, the inner posterior nerve anastomosing near mid-blade, the anterior nerve (when present) and outer posterior ones much shorter, the venation sharply prominulous beneath, less so or subimpressed above.
Peduncles 1-2 per node, stout, l^(-6.5) cm; spikes without filaments 7-9 mm diam., the fls contiguous, the fl-buds obtuse, the filiform bracts 2- 2.5 mm pilosulous, persistent;^/ow^r^ 5-merous, normally 10-androus bisexual; calyx turbinate 1.7-2.7 mm, finely prominulously 5-nerved, pilosulous extemally, the subulate unequal teeth 0.7-1.4 mm, on margin with a few thickened livid trichomes; corolla turbinate-campanulate 3-4.2 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 1-1.4 x 0.8- 11 mm, pilosulous extemally and marginally fimbriolate with minute thickened processes; filaments free above immediate base, light purple, exserted 5-6 mm; ovary glabrous at anthesis, velutinous after fertilization.
Pods scattered along spike-axis, in profile broad-linear, attenuate at base into the marcescent calyx, abruptly cuspidate, straight or almost so, overall 40-60 x 7.5- 9.5 mm, the straight or shallowly undulate replum 0.6-0.8 mm wide, the stifl[iy papery valves coUiculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into 4-8 free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 5.5-10 mm long, the replum and valves alike densely softly velvety-pilosulous overall.
On open grassy hillsides and slopes of barrancas at lower edge of the oak-belt, 550-1050 m, localized in the w. foothills of Sa.
Madre Occidental in s.-e. Sonora, Mexico.—Fl.
II-IV. This seldom collected mimosa seems related to M. guatemalensis and M. dysocarpa, and nearer the former in leaf-formula, but may be recognized by a peculiar growth-habit and rhythm of anthesis, by lack of interpinnal spicules, by thicker denser flower-spikes, and by relatively long calyx-teeth.
The mature summer foliage has yet to be collected.
26.
Mimosa guatemalensis (Hooker & Amott) Bentham, Bot. voy.
Sulphur 89.
1844, based on Inga (?) guatemalensis Hooker & Amott, Bot. Beechey Voy.
419.
1841.-"Realejo .
.
.
N. Lat.
12°45'.
.
.
Guatemala [now Nicaragua, but the plant in reality collected most probably at Tepic, Nayarit, Mexico]."—Holotypus, Sinclair s.n.,
s. loc, K (hb. Hook.)! = MICH Neg. 613; presumed isotypi, labelled "Tepic, Barclay,'' K (hb. Hook.,
hb. Benth:)\—Acacia (sphalm.) guatemalensis Bentham, 1875: 414 (in syn.), 647.
Stiffly branched shrub attaining 1.5(-?) m, randomly armed on intemodes with 2 infrastipular and 1, often distantly displaced, infrapetiolar, nearly straight, horizontal broad-based aculei 2- 8 mm, silky-pilosulous or -tomentulose throughout with fine loose lustrous hairs to ±0.2-0.3 mm, the pale green, marginally revolute lfts pubescent on both faces but paler and more densely subvelutinous beneath, the infforescence a proximally leafy-bracteate, distally efoliate, simple pseudoraceme of verticillate amentiform spikes 1.5-5 dm above foliage.
Stipules erect, ovate or lanceolate 2.5-5.5 x 0.7-2.5 mm, becoming dry pallid, either bluntly 1-nerved dorsally or obscurely nerved.
Leaf-formula (ii-)iii-vi/(3-)4-7, the lf-stks 3-7 cm, either unarmed or randomly aculeolate, the petiole and longer interpinnal segments ±1-2.5 cm, the ventral sulcus bridged between pinna-pairs and charged there with a pallid spicule 0.7-2 mm; pinnae accrescent distally, the rachis (sometimes minutely spiculate between lfts) of longer ones 2-5 cm; lfts ovate, elliptic or elliptic-obovate, abruptly minutely apiculate, the longer ones (7-) 10-20 x (3-)5-12 mm, 1.6-2.1 times as long as wide, all veinless or weakly pallid-veined above, prominulously 2-3(-4)-nerved beneath, the slightly excentric midrib pinnately 2-6-branched on each side, the inner posterior nerve weakly brochidodrome either below or beyond mid-blade, a fine tertiary venulation developed or not.
Flower-spikes (1-)2-5 per node of pseudoraceme, without filaments 5-6 mm diam., the pliant axis, including peduncle, 6-13.5 cm, the linear bracts 1-1.6 mm, early caducous, the obovoid ff-buds densely pallid-sericeous; flowers sessile (4-)5-merous diplostemonous, all bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate, extemally silky-velutinous 1.5-1.9 mm, the deltate teeth 0.2-0.5 mm; corolla campanulate-vaseshaped 2.4-3.5 mm, the erect lobes 1-1.4 X 0.65- 0.8 mm; filaments pink, very shortly united below ovary, exserted 4-6.5 mm.
Pods ±1-5 per spike, sessile or narrowed at base into a stipelike neck to 4 mm, in profile linear, gently or falcately curved, 35-50 x 5-6.5 mm, 5-8-seeded, the almost straight, unarmed or randomly few-aculeolate replum 0.5-0.8 mm wide, the valves bullately elevated over each seed, the valves and replum alike densely silky-velutinous overaU, the valves breaking up into free-falling articles 4.5- 6.5 mm long. In shrub thickets, subdeciduous woodland and open oak-woodland, sometimes in roadside hedges, ranging from ±200 m in the Pacific foothills to 1700 m in the Balsas Basin, discontinuously dispersed in tropical w. Mexico from Sinaloa (n. of Copala) and Nayarit e. through Guerrero and Michoacan to s.-e. Mexico.—R. X-II. 27.
Mimosa egregia Sandwith, BuU.
Misc.
Infor.
1936: 7.
1936.-"Mexico.
State of Guerrero: district of Coyuca; El Pochote.
. .ff.
July 1934; I. R. F. Quirio, Coyuca .
.
. fr.
Nov. 1934."
- Syntypi, Hinton 6314 (ff) & 6907 (fr), K ! - Isosyntypi, F (no. 6314 = F Neg. 65790)\ NY (both)! MacrophylUdious drought-deciduous shrubs attaining 1.5-4 m, either unarmed or randomly armed on few intemodes with 1-2 stout recurved aculei ±3-5 mm, the young branches, lvs and infforescence silky-pilosulous or -tomentulose with fine shining, mostly dense and spreading but on upper face of lfts thinner, subappressed hairs, the ample lfts pale green, a little paler on lower face, the infforescence an efoliate or basally few-lvd pseudoraceme of amentiform spikes 1- 4 dm above foliage.
Stipules firm lanceolate 2- 6 mm, bluntly 1 -nerved or almost nerveless.
Leafformula ii-iii/1-2, the lf-stks 6-12 cm, the ventral sulcus either continuous between pinnae or weakly bridged and then sometimes charged with 1-2 small pallid spicules; pinnae either subequilong and all bifoliolate, or accrescent upward and the distal pair then 4-foliolate, the rachis of the latter 1-5.5 cm; lfts obliquely obovate, either obtuse mucronulate or depressed-acuminulate at apex, the larger ones ±3-6 x 2-4.5 cm, all (3-) 4-5-nerved from pulvinule, the forwardly curved midrib pinnately 5-7-branched on each side, the inner posterior nerve similarly pinnate and produced well beyond mid-blade, the secondary and tertiary nervules pallidly discolored on both faces of blade but sharply prominulous only on lower one.
Flower-spikes verticillate by 2-5(-7), without filaments 4.5-5 mm diam., the pliant axis, including peduncle, 6-11 cm; bracts less than 1.5 mm, caducous; ff-buds obovoid, densely pallidsericeous; yZou^^r^ sessile, 5-merous 10-androus, aU bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.8- 1 mm, weakly 5-nerved, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.1-0.15 mm; coroUa 2.1-2.4 mm, cleft ± half-way, the 1-nerved lobes at first ascending, recurved in age; filaments pale pink fading whitish, at very base united to corolla, exserted 4-6 mm; ovary sericeous after fertilization.
Pods scattered along spike-axis, sessile or almost so, in profile linear or linear-oblong, straight or gently curved, 25-45 x 4-8.5 mm, 5-8-seeded, the shaUowly undulate or nearly straight replum ±0.4 mm thick, the replum and valves alike densely pilosulous and randomly granulate overall, the valves buUately elevated over each seed, when ripe becoming papery stramineous and breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 4.5-6 mm long, either broader or narrower than long. On dry brushy hillsides at elevations not recorded, apparently local, known only from the Balsas Basin in s.-e. Mexico (Temascaltepec) and Guerrero (Coyuca), Mexico.—Fl.
VI-VIII. Remarkable for few, very large leaffets, in which it differs from related M. guatemalensis and M. spirocarpa.
It has the fruit of the former, but almost the leaf-formula of the latter.
28.
Mimosa spirocarpa Rose, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 3: 316, pi. 11.
1895.-"Collected by Dr. Edward Palmer, Culiacan [Sinaloa], August 27 to September 15, 1891, in flower (No. 1476); October 25 to November 18, 1891, in fmit (Letter H)."
—Syntypi, US!; both isosyntypi, MICH! NY! Stiffly branched macrophyllidious shrubs, randomly armed on some intemodes with 1-2 distally recurved broad-based aculei 2-6 mm (some whole branches unarmed), the annotinous stems brown or fuscous lenticellate, the young lvs canescent, the mature ones green but a little paler dorsally, the amentiform fl-spikes mostly 2-4- nate in the axil of coevally expanding lvs on hornotinous branches, or some distal ones pseudoracemose, together forming a foUate panicle.
Stipules linear-attenuate or -ligulate 3-5.5 mm, bluntly or obscurely 1 -nerved dorsally, becoming dry but persistent.
Leaf-formula iii-vi/2-3, the pinnae distally accrescent, the proximal pair often very short and 2-foliolate, the If-stk (4-)5- 10 cm, the longer interpinnal segments ± 1.5-2.5 cm, the ventral sulcus continuous between pinna-pairs (spicules 0), the rachis of distal pinnae (1-) 1.5-3.5 cm; lfts accrescent distally, obliquely obovate obtuse, the distal pair of larger lvs 13- 28 X 8-23 mm, 1.2-1.9 times as long as wide, aU 3-5-nerved from pulvinule, the little-displaced incurved midrib 2-5-branched on each side, the inner posterior nerve expiring near or beyond mid-blade, the rest weak and short, the tertiary venulation 0 or random, the palUd nerves prominulous only beneath.
Flower-spikes without filaments 4.5-6 mm diam., the axis including short peduncle 6-10 cm, the bracts linear, less than 1 mm, caducous; fl-buds obovoid, densely silky overall; flowers sessile, 5-merous 10-androus, all bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.8-1.6 mm, the subulate or depressed-deltate teeth 0.2- 0.5 mm, often unequal; corolla turbinate 2.2-2.7 mm, the ascending ovate lobes 1-1.2 x 0.65- 0.8 mm, 1 -nerved; filaments pink fading whitish, united at very base to corolla, exserted 5-6.5 mm.
Pods scattered along spike-axis, sessile, in maturation becoming rolled to one side into a tight spiral of 1-1.5 tums in dorsoventral view 7-10 mm diam., the face exterior to the spiral strongly buUate-distended, the interior face correspondingly depressed but elevated over each seed, the replum 0.3-0.4 mm wide, together with the papery valves densely silky-tomentellous overall, the ripe valves breaking up into 5-6 freefalling, individually dehiscent articles 4-5 mm long and 3-4 mm wide, the plumply lentiform seeds Ll-^t x 1.6-2.2 mm, their testa glossy dark brown.
In thom-forest below 300 m, known in characteristic fruiting condition only from centr. and s. Sinaloa, Mexico, but perhaps occurring also at the w. edge of the Balsas Depression in Michoacan (Apatzingan).—Fl.
VI-X. This remarkable species is distinguished with difficulty from M. guatemalensis when in flower, but becomes instantly recognizable in fruit.
Two collections seen from Apatzingan in Michoacan closely resemble M. spirocarpa vegetatively, in particular in leaf-formula, but their identity will remain open to question until the matching fruits are obtained.
29.
Mimosa xochipalensis R. Grether, Syst. Bot. 13: 425, fig. 1.
1988.-"Mexico, Guerrero, Municipio de Zumpango del Rio, 10 km al E-SE de Xochipala, camino a FUo de CabaUo, alt. 760 m .
.
.
22 Nov 1978, Grether 1144 & Quero.
.
. ."—Holotypus, MEXU (not seen); isotypi, NY! et alibi plures.
Macrophyllidious arborescent shrubs attaining 5 m, armed or not with intemodal, straight or declined aculei, the young stems and If-axes thinly pubemlent, the thick-textured lfts glabrous. the inflorescence an efoliate or in part hysteranthously foliate pseudoraceme of short pedunculate fl-spikes, at anthesis well exserted and potentially to 4-6 dm long. Stipules linear-subulate 2-4(-5) mm, 1-nerved.
Leaf-formula i-ii/1, the petiole and rachis (when present) each l-2(-3.5) cm, the rachis of distal piimae ± 1-2 cm; lfts reniform-orbicular, obtuse or subemarginate, the larger ±15-25 x 12-25 mm (few larger), aU 4-nerved from pulvinule, the branched primary nerves camptodrome within a smooth continuous margin, the venulation prominulous on both faces.
Spikes 2-3 per node, including peduncle ±4-6 cm, without filaments 5-7 mm diam.; flowers sessile, 4-5-merous, silky-tomentulose overall, the campanulate low-dentate calyx 1- 1.5 mm, the pink coroUa 2-3 mm; filaments pink, free, exserted ±5.5 mm.
Pod subsessile or stipitate, the stipe to 3-5 mm, the undulately linear body in profile (25-)35-65(-75) x 6-9(-10)mm, commonly 5-8-seeded, tomentulose overall, the valves buUately distended over each seed, disarticulating when ripe.
On rocky slopes in low deciduous woodland dominated by woody Leguminosae and arborescent cacti, 730-900 m, known only from Canon del Zopilote in mun. Zumpango del Rio, on the n. slope of Sa.
Madre del Sur in Guerrero, Mexico.-Fl.
VII-XI. 30.
Mimosa polyantha Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 410. lS42.-''Mexico, Andrieux n. 397."
, the data expanded by Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30:418.1875 to: "Acatlan [Puebla]."
—Holotypus, a plant bearing only reduced lvs from brachyblasts, K! M. polyantha var. levior B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33:318.1898. -"Collected in W. Mexico [near Culiacan, Sinaloa, ace.
McVaugh, 1987: 217], 1891-1892, by Dr. EdwardPalmer... Types in herb.
Gray and herb.
U.S. Natl.
Mus."-Syntypus, GH!; presumed iso-syntypus, NY! M. ionema B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 36: 473.
1901.-"Collected by C. G. Pringle in the valley below Cuemavaca [Morelos], Mexico, altitude 1,230 m., 17 October, 1900, no. 8377."-Holotypus GH!; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54765, NY! M. polyanthoides B. L. Robinson, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist. 31: 260.
1904.—"Mexico: on mountains above Iguala, Guerrero, alt. 1,230 m, 5 October, 1900, C G. Pringle "^o.
8408."-Holotypus, GH!; isotypus, NY! —Equated with M. polyantha by Grether, 1987: 318.
M. stipitata B. L. Robinson, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist. 31:261.
1904.—"Mexico: on mountains above Iguala, Guerrero, alt. 1230 m, 5 October, 1900, C. G. PringleNo.
8406."-Holotypus, GH!; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54793, NY!—Equated with M. polyantha by Grether, 1897: 318.
M. setigera Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 160.
1928.-"Rosario, Sinaloa, April 14, 1910, Rose, Standley & Russell 7^555."-Holotypus, US!; isotypus NY!—Equated with M. polyantha by Grether, 1987: 318. (?) M. brevispicata (Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. n.23(3): 161.
1928.-"Tacuiloltepec, Puebla, 1909, [C A.] Purpus i557."-Holotypus, NY! Xeromorphic, drought-deciduous shrubs attaining 1-3.5 m, with stiflly flexuous, fuscous or pallid branches either unarmed or randomly armed at or close below some nodes with a single broad-based recurved aculeus 2-9 mm (exceptionally accompanied by 1-2 infrastipular ones), at anthesis diverse in aspect due to seasonal, perhaps partly genetic variation in foliage and inflorescence: at one extreme, the small, relatively simple lvs and loose fl-spikes all fasciculate on brachyblasts lateral to annotinous stems, the lvs then sometimes hysteranthous; at the other extreme, the longer ampler lvs and axillary fl-spikes borne serially along newly expanding long-shoots (the two extremes rarely coinciding on one plant), the foliage in either case pallid green concolorous, finely puberulent or glabrate.
Stipules subdimorphic, those of long-shoots linear-attenuate or setiform 2-5 mm, those of brachyblasts ovate or ligulate, often tomentulose.
Leaf-formula (i-)iivii(-viii)/7-18(-24), the lf-stks of primary lvs 3 - 15 cm, of fasciculate lvs ± 1 — 4 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae l-3.5(-5) cm; lfts narrowly oblong or oblong-eUiptic, obtuse or commonly apiculate, the longer ones (2.2-)3-7(-9) mm, (2.2-)3- 4.2(-4.5) times as long as wide, all weakly (1-)2(- 3)-nerved from pulvinule, the simple or faintly branched midrib little or scarcely excentric, the posterior nerve(s) faint and short.
Flower-spikes without filaments 4.5-5.5(-6) mm diam., the axis including short peduncle (1.5-)2-4.5(-6) cm; pedicels 0-0.3 mm; fl-buds obovoid-pyriform, glabrous or minutely puberulent; flowers 4-5- merous diplostemonous, all or most bisexual; calyx shallowly campanulate or funnel-shaped 0.4-0.7(-0.9) mm, glabrous or puberulent, the orifice either truncate or minutely denticulate; corolla turbinate-campanulate 2.6-3.1 mm, cleft nearly half-way; filaments either white or lilac, monadelphous into an obscure stemonozone, exserted 3.5-7.5 mm.
Pods to 10 per spike but usually fewer, stipitate, the stipe 3-10 mm, the oblong or broad-linear body (25-)30-55(-60) x (7_)8-l2 mm, (4-)5-8-seeded, cuneate at base, abmptly cuspidate at apex, the replum and papery valves usually hairless, minutely reddishgranular, but sometimes hispid with erect setae to 1-2 mm, the valves bullate over each seed, breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent or tardily dehiscent articles 4.5-6(-6.5) mm long. In matorral, thom-forest, and tropical deciduous forest, mostly below 1300 m, becoming weedy along roadsides and in fences, widespread in tropical Mexico from the coastal plain of centr. Sinaloa s. to Nayarit and w. Jalisco, thence e. through the Balsas Depression to Puebla and s. to centr. Oaxaca.—Fl.
V-IX, sporadically later (I, II). — Chacapo, espino (Guerrero).
The complexly variable M. polyantha perhaps represents the matrix from which evolved M. distachya.
It differs from M. distachya sens. lat. most obviously in more numerous and smaUer leaflets, but further from var. distachya, where sympatric on the Pacific coast, in glabrous flowers, and from both this and the more northem var. laxiflora, like it in glabrous flowers, in position of the primary cauline aculei next to, not displaced below, the nodes.
Mimosa distachya var. oligacantha, however, while different in fewer leaffets and in dispersal, has similarly situated cauline prickles, and consequently distinction between M. polyantha and M. distachya at the specific level is open to challenge and needs corroboration.
Plants ofM. polyantha that bear their ffowers on brachyblasts, accompanied by or only succeeded by relatively short leaves, differ greatly in general aspect from those that bear ffowers on long-shoots, when each spike is subtended, and sometimes surpassed, by a longer primary leaf.
This dual aspect and variation in indumentum of the pod account for most of the synonymy listed.
31.
Mimosa distachya CavaniUes, Icon.
3: 48.
1795.—Typus infra sub var. distachya indicatur.
Drought-deciduous, potentially arborescent shrubs attaining 4 m, with pallid annotinous and ffexuous terete, distantly or sparsely foliate young branches, either unarmed or randomly armed at or below nodes either with a solitary recurved. broad-based infrapetiolar aculeus 1-8 mm or occasionally also with 1-2 infrastipular ones, either glabrous throughout except for tomentulose axillary buds, or transiently pubemlent, or finely silky-pubemlent throughout, the foliage pale green or subglaucescent, the lfts either plane or (in one var.) incipiently revolute, the loose or relatively compact spikes or spiciform racemes bome either solitary or to 4 together in the axil of coevally expanding lvs, the whole infforescence pseudoracemose only in praefforation.
Stipules lance-subulate, linear-ligulate or setiform, (1-) 1.5-3.5 X 0.2-0.7 mm, 1-nerved or almost nerveless, becoming dry and fragile.
Leafstalks (2-)2.5-10 cm, the petiole (0.7-)l-3.5 cm, the interpinnal segments up to 5-20(-26) mm, the ventral sulcus either continuous or occasionally bridged between pinna-pairs and minutely spiculate; pinnae 2-4(-5)-jug., the rachis of longer ones 6-35 mm; lfts 3-6(-7)-jug., subequilong or distally accrescent, in outline oblong, obovate, or oblance-elliptic, obtuse mucronulate or apiculate, the larger ones 3.5-17 x 2-11 mm, 1.5-3 times as long as wide, all dorsally (2-)3-4-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib slightly or considerably displaced, simple or pinnately 1-3- branched on each side, the inner posterior nerve expiring or brochidodrome beyond mid-blade, the outer ones much shorter.
Spikes or racemes 4.5-6.5 mm diam. without filaments, the peduncle and fforal axis together (1.5-)2-9 cm, the pyriform ff-buds either glabrous or thinly puberulent, the minute bracts caducous; pedicels at anthesis 0-0.8 mm (in fruit sometimes to 1.2 mm); flowers 5-merous 10-androus, all bisexual; calyx membranous, openly campanulate or turbinate-campanulate 0.4-1.4 mm, the rim either truncate or denticulate, the deltate teeth 0.1-0.3 mm; corolla turbinately vase-shaped 2.1-3 mm, the 1-nerved lobes ascending or at length recurved, 0.9-1.5 mm; filaments either white or pale pink, united at very base into a stemonozone, exserted 3-6 mm; ovary either glabrous or minutely puberulent laterally, sometimes becoming densely puberulent after fertilization.
Pods to 15 per spike but commonly fewer, either stipitate or sessile, the stipe attaining 7 mm, the broad-linear, gently recurved body (13-) 17-60 X 5-8.5 m, (2-)3-9(-l l)-seeded, the replum either undulately constricted between seeds or nearly straight, either smooth unarmed or hispidly setose, the papery green, later stramineous valves prominently umbonate or low-buUate over each seed, delicately venulose, either glabrous overall, or glabrous and minutely granular, or puberulent overall, and in addition often hispid with erect setaculei to l-1.5(-2) mm, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, at length individually dehiscent articles 4-8 mm long. As here interpreted, M. distachya is a polymorphic species of bicentric dispersal, in desert and seasonally drought-stressed brush-woodland, about the western shores of the Caribbean and on the Pacific slope in Mexico, where it extends to Baja Califomia and northward through the Sonoran Desert into southwestern Arizona.
It is very closely related to the also polymorphic M. polyantha, which is mostly vicariant in upland interior southern Mexico, but sympatric with M. distachya in Sinaloa.
Mimosa polyantha scarcely differs from M. distachya except in more numerous and smaller leafets, and is equally variable in indumentum of the pod, while fewer and larger leaffets, reduced to one or exceptionally two pairs per pinna, alone distinguish the also closely related M. rosei.
Specimens (Purpus 3179, NY) ambiguous between M. polyantha and M. distachya have been collected on the PueblaOaxaca boundary, and these populations (left unclassified herein), which may perhaps include the type of M. brevispicata Britton, require close scrutiny in the field.
Four varieties of M. distachya are defined below.
The var. oligacantha, distinguished principally by stout infrapetiolar aculei arising immediately below each node and not downwardly displaced onto the intemode, is geographically detached.
Its leaves are finely pubescent except sometimes ventrally, its ffowers are sessile, and its short-stipitate pod is both puberulent and remotely or randomly hispid with a few erect setaculei.
The vars. distachya and laxiflora are geographically vicariant along the coastal plain and foothills of western Mexico and morphologically conffuent.
Collectively they may have either glabrous or puberulent foliage, either sessile or pedicellate ffowers, and pods either glabrous or pubemlent and in addition (independently) either hispidly setose or not.
The var. laxiflora is arbitrarily set off" by a combination of glabrous foliage, racemose ffowers, smooth pod, and dispersal within the Sonoran Desert east and north of the Gulf of Califomia.
The variation in the residue is discussed brieffy under var. distachya.
The var. chamelae, apparently confined to coastal Jalisco and Colima and adjoining Michoacan, has a fruit entirely compatible with var. distachya, but differs in relatively ample leaves, long pinnae, and large, incipiently revolute leaffets.
In aspect it suggests M. guatemalensis, but the leaflet-venation and broader, less prominently bullate craspedium agree with M. distachya sens, lat. It may deserve specific status.
Key to varieties of M. distachya 1.
Rachis of distal pinnae 6-24 mm; lfts plane, the larger ones 3.5-12 x 2-6(-7) mm; range of the species.
2.
Aculei, when present, either solitary or (seldom) 3 per intemode, the infrapetiolar one ± downwardly displaced from node; calyx 0.4-1.2 mm; pod (4-)5-9(-l l)-seeded; Pacific Mexico and s.-w. Arizona.
3.
Fls either sessile, or puberulent extemally, or both; s. Sonora to Nayarit, and Baja Califomia Sur; pod either sessile or shortly stipitate, the stipe 0-1.5 (exceptionally 3) mm, the valves either glabrous or puberulent, and either setose or not 31a. var. distachya (p. 82).
3.
Fls at once pedicellate and glabrous except for minute granules 31b. var. laxiflora (p. 83).
2.
Aculei, when present, always solitary and infrapetiolar, inserted immediately below and adjacent to the If-pulvinus; calyx 1-1.4 mm; pod (puberulent, thinly setose or esetose) stipitate, (2-)3-5-seeded; Caribbean lowlands of n.-e. Colombia, n.-w. Venezuela, Dutch E. Indies, w. Cuba and Yucatan, Mexico 31c. var. oligacantha (p. 83).
1.
Rachis of distal pinnae 25-35 mm; larger lfts 14-21 x 8-15 mm, their margin revolute, especially near pulvinule; pod sessile and hispid; coastal plain of Jalisco and Colima, and adj. Michoacan 3Id. var. chamelae (p. 83).
31a. Mimosa distachya CavaniUes var. distachya.
M. distachya CavaniUes, Icon.
3:48, t. 295.
1795. —"Habitat in Nova-Hispania.
Florebat in Regio horto Matritensi mensibus Augusto et Septembri 1795."—The specimen so labelled in herb.
CavaniUes. (MA! = F Neg. 29424) is not dated, but is presumably the cultivated plant described and figured in the protologue, and would serve as lectotypus.— It seems likely that the plant was raised from seeds provided by Sesse & Mociiio, and these may perhaps be from their plant described by DeCandoUe as Acacia prosopoides (q.v.,
sequ.).
Bentham, 1875:417, equated M. distachya with M. oligacantha, but the latter is not known from Mexico.
Except that Cavanilles's plant is unarmed, it agrees best with the western Mexican plants called M. fuertensis, M. setigera, and M. ferrisiae by Britton & Rose (1928); the lack of aculei in a young cultivated plant would not be surprising.
Acaciaprosopoides DeCandolle, Prodr. 2:460.1825.— "(fl. mex. ic. ined.) ... in Nova-Hispania.'—Holotypus, sheet 6331.108 in the icones of Sesse & Mocino in the Hunt Library, Pittsburgh!—Equivocally referred by Bentham, 1875: 366, 418, either to Piptadenia [=Adenopodia] patens or Mimosa laxiflora, but the figure decisively portrays some form of M. distachya with solitary intemodal prickles such as could have been encountered by Sesse only on the w. coast of Mexico.—A phototransparency of the holotypus, NY! Mimosa brandegei B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 316.
1898.-"San Jose del Cabo, Todos Santos, La Paz, Lower Calif., Brandegee, no. 184.. . ."-Syntypes, GH! UC.
M. purpurascens B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 317.
1898.-"Lower Calif, at La Paz, 5ra«- degee, 4 February, 1890, no. 185, in flower, and at Purisima, 13 Febmary, 1889."-Syntypi, UC.
M. ferrisiae Britton & Rose in Ferris, Contr. Dudley Herb. 1(2): 70, pi. 3, fig. 4.
1927.-"Collected by Roxana S. Ferris near road between Penal Colony and lighthouse, Maria Madre, Tres Marias Islands, October 21, 1925 (5563)."-Holotypus, DS (not seen); isotypus, NY! M. fuertensis Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 157.
1928.-"Vicinity of Fuerte, Sinaloa, on dry hiUs, March 26, 1910, Rose, Standley & Russell i4555."-Holotypus, US!; isotypus, NY! M. brandegei & M. purpurascens sensu Shreve & Wiggins, 1964: 608.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In thorn forest, deciduous short-tree forest, and along washes in desert, below 700 m, scattered along and near the Gulf coast of Baja CaUfomia Sur from ±27°N to Cabo S. Lucas, and on the lower foothills and coastal plain of s. Sonora and Sinaloa; Sta. Maria Is., Nayarit.-R. VII-XI, perhaps sporadically at other seasons. — Garapatillo.
The syndrome of variable characters associated with the proposed segregates here reduced to var. distachya are as follows: M. brandegei: lfts relatively large, to ±14 x 7 1991] BARJNJEBY: SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 83 mm, pubemlent beneath; fls pedicellate, silkypubemlent; pod subsessile, at once pilosulous and setose.
M. purpurascens: lfts minutely pubemlent beneath, to 6 mm long; fls subsessile pubescent; pod pilosulous esetose.
M. ferrisiae: lfts minutely puberulent to 15 x 7 mm; fls subsessile, puberulent; pod subsessile, densely puberulent esetose.
M. fuertensis: lfts puberulent very small, to 4 x 2 mm; fls subsessile glabrous; pod unknown.
Indumentum of foliage, flowers, and fruits, length of pedicels, and length of pod's stipe vary independently of leaflet-size and of each other.
31b. Mimosa distachya CavaniUes var. laxiflora (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. laxiflora Bentham, London J. Bot 5: 93.
1846.-"Sonora alta, Mexico, Cow/^^r."
—Holotypus, K! M. laxiflora sensu Isely, 1971b: 419, 1973: 104, map 31 (Arizona only); Shreve & Wiggins, 1964: 608.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
On dry stony hillsides and along desert washes below 350 m, in thorn forest and with arborescent cacti, widespread over plains and foothills of Sonora, Mexico, extending n. into the Gila Desert in Arizona (Pima Co.) and s. into the Fuerte valley in n. Sinaloa and adj. Chihuahua, in Sinaloa fading into var. distachya.—Fl.
VIIIX.—G<2^M/2<3(5).
31c. Mimosa distachya CavaniUes var. oligacantha (DeCandolle) Bameby, stat. nov. M. oligacantha DeCandolle, Prodr. 2:429.1825.— "ad Sanctam-Martham [Colombia], Bertero."
—Holotypus, Bertero s.n.,
misit Balbis 1822, G-DC! = F Neg. 6984.
M. oligacantha sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 158; Britton & Killip, 1936: 152.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
On dry hillsides and rocky shores along and near the arid Caribbean coast of n.-e. Colombia (Sta. Marta) and n.-w. Venezuela (Falcon), thence s. in Venezuela and to 650 m in the state of Lara; Dutch W. Indies (Cura9ao and Amba); disjunct on w. Cuba (La Habana) and Yucatan, Mexico. — Fl.
Yl-X.—Rala-Patras; rahagato (Ven.).
Bentham equated M. oligacantha with M. distachya, of which he considered it merely a strongly armed form.
The position of the cauUne aculei immediately below the nodes and not on the intemodes is a distinctive quality of all specimens seen.
Similarly situated aculei are common, however, in M. polyantha, which could be considered an element of an extended M. distachya.
3Id. Mimosa distachya CavaniUes var. chamelae Bameby, var. nov., ab aliis speciei varietatibus foliis amplioribus, pinnamm summamm rachi 2.5-3.5 (nec 0.6-2.4) cm longa, earumque foliolis 8-15 (nec 2-7) mm usque latis saltem basi revolutis (nec planissimis) diversa, legumine sessili hispido cum var. distachyae formis congruo.—Mexico.
Colima: Colima to Pihuamo, 23.
IX.1960 (fl), B. C. Templeton 5956.-Holotypus, MICH.-JaUsco: Chamela, 7.
XII.1975 (fr), L. Alfredo Perez J. 7277.-Paratypus fmct.,
MICH.
M. distachya sensu Rose, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 1: 326.
IS93 (Palmer 1291\).
M. brandegei sensu McVaugh, 1987: 206, max. ex parte.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In tropical deciduous woodland below 550 m, along the coastal plain of s.-w. Mexico in Jalisco and Colima, and extending inland to the w. arm of the Balsas Depression in Michoacan.—Fl. (VI-)VII-XII. The var. chamelae seems to have the essential characters of M. distachya but leaves resembling those of M. guatemalensis in amplitude.
McVaugh (1987, I.e.) describes the larger leaflets as attaining 25 x 20 mm, larger than any seen by the writer.
32.
Mimosa rosei B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33:317.1898.-"CoUected in young fruit by Dr. J. N. Rose, at Balaiios [properly Bolafios], Jalisco, 10 to 19 September, 1897, no. 2919."-Holotypus, GH! = NY Neg. 11988; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54777.
US! = photo + fragm, NY! M. laxiflora var. zygophylloides B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 317.
1898.-"Collected in flower at Manzanillo, Colima, by Prof. M. E. Jones, 25 June, 1892, no. 193 (Herb. U.S. Nat. Mus.)."
- Holotypus; US; presumed isotypi, though numbered 101, 102, POM!-Equated with the foUowing by Britton & Rose, 1928: 156, and with the preceding by McVaugh, 1987: 218.
M. paucifoliolata M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 34(3): 278, t. 24.
1903.-"Environs de las Minitas [between Arteaga, Guerrero and rio Balsas—cf McVaugh, Candollea 13: 202.
1951] 400 m, [11] juiUet 1898."—Holotypus, Langlasse 233, G!; isotypus F! = NY Neg. 11904. —Equated with the preceding by B. L. Robinson, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist. 31: 260.
1904; and with M. rosei by McVaugh, 1987: 218.
Subarborescent 5/zrwZ75 attaining 2(-?) m, either unarmed or randomly armed at or below nodes with a small, or stout broad-based infrapetiolar (and rarely in addition an infrastipular) aculeus, glabrous except for often strigulose-tomentose stipules and puberulent lf-stks, the foliage bicolored, brighter green but dull above, the inflorescence a leafy-bracteate panicle or pseudoraceme of spikes or spiciform racemes, the fruits immersed in foliage.
Stipules 1.5-4 mm, bluntly 1-nerved.
Leaf-formula (i-)ii-iv/l(-2, but 2 only in distal pinnae of exceptionally lush Ivs), the lfstks (1-)2-12 cm, the petiole and longer interpinnal segments 1-5 cm, spicules 0; rachis of longer pinnae mostly 4—14 mm, but that of distal pair sometimes attaining 3 cm; lfts obliquely obovate obtuse, the longer ones (6-)7-22(-27) x (4-)5-14(-17) mm, ±1.2-1.6 times as long as wide, all (3-)4-5-nerved from petiolule, the midrib slightly excentric and weakly pinnate, the inner posterior nerve obscurely brochidodrome beyond mid-blade, the secondary venulation faint, prominulous beneath only.
Spikes solitary and geminate, including short peduncle 2.5-6.5 cm; bracts caducous; pedicels 0.1-1 mm; flowers 5-merous diplostemonous, glabrous; calyx campanulate ±0.7-0.8 mm, deltately denticulate; corolla ±2-2.4 mm; filaments pink free.
Pods stipitate, the stipe 1.5-10 mm, the linear, almost straight or shallowly decurved body in profile ±35-60 X 5.5-7 mm, 6-8-seeded, the shallowly undulate replum and papery valves glabrous or thinly setose, the valves green or purplish becoming stramineous and low-buUate over each seed, breaking up into free-falling articles 4.5- 7.5 mm long. In deciduous tropical woodland and thornscrub, on a variety of substrates including gypsum, near sea-level to 1000 m, locally common in scattered Mexican stations in the basins of Lerma-Santiago and S. Pedro rivers in Jalisco, e. into centr. Balsas Depression in Guerrero.— n .
IX-III. Mimosa rosei is certainly nearly akin to M. distachya and M. polyantha, and is perhaps derived from the former by reduction of leaf-formula and reciprocal dilation of leaflet-blades.
These vary considerably in maximum size, but I readily follow McVaugh in recognizing only one taxonomic entity.
B(ii).
Series A N D I N A E Bameby JVIimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Andinae Bameby, ser. nov., caulibus aculeis subrectis 1-3 infranodalibus armatis, foliorum rachi spiculis interpinnalibus obsita, floribus 5-meris, leguminis applanati valvis supra semina vix colliculatis (nec buUatim elevatis) maturis nunc integris nunc articulatis inter aflines recognoscenda.—Sp. typica: M. andina Bentham.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Acanthocarpae sensu Bentham, 1875: 427, minore ex parte (spp. 202, 203, 205, caeteris exclusis).
Stiflly branched, mostly microphyllidious shrubs and trees, some attaining 5 m, randomly armed below nodes on the infrapetiolar and on either one or both infrastipular ribs (and occasionally on lf-stks) with mostly straight, broadbased aculei.
Indumentum of small simple hairs and livid or reddish granules, neither glandular nor setose.
Stipules subulate-setiform, 1-nerved or nerveless, persistent.
Leaf-formula ii-xiii/5- 20, the If-stk bridged between all pinnae, and spiculate between most, the longer lfts commonly 1.6-8 X 0.5-2.7 mm.
Inflorescence either pseudoracemose or axillary, the globose, ovoid, or plumply oblong-ellipsoid capitula moriform prior to anthesis; calyx campanulate (0.5-)0.6-2 mm, either subtmncate or denticulate; flowers 5(-6)-merous (random irregularities); coroUa 1.9- 3.8 mm; filaments free or obscurely connate into a stemonozone.
Pod sessile or shortly stipitate, linear or broad-linear in profile, commonly decurved, the replum 0.4-1.1 mm diam., either aculeate or not, the body 5-14 mm wide, the valves separating from replum along dorsal side or along both sides, either in one piece or randomly fractured between seeds.
Spp. 4, of montane elevations (1300-3500 m) in the Andes of s. Colombia, Ecuador, and n. Pem.
This small series of sect. Batocaulon stands almost alone in South America by preserving a primitive pentandrous flower, a character shared with the also Andean (and sympatric) ser. Re- 1991] BARNEBY: SENSITIVE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 85 volutae, which differ in the archaic feature of petiolar nectaries.
Pentamerous species of sect. Batocaulon are numerous in Mexico, but these have either flowers in tasselled spikes, or espiculate leaf-stalks, or pod-valves buUately expressed over the seeds.
While ser. Andinae is no doubt very closely akin to these pentamerous Mexican mimosas and not separable from aU of them by any one infallible character, it seems conceptually useful to segregate taxonomically an alliance of unquestioned phylogenetic unity, one that has most probably differentiated in situ from ser. 7?^- volutae or its immediate forebears and in the process lost the primitive petiolar nectary.
Conspectus of ser. Andinae Mimosa * Lfts of longer pinnae 10-20-jug. 33. quitensis Bentham 34. weberbaueri Harms ** Lfts of longer pinnae 6-9(-10)-jug. 35. andina Bentham 36. montana Kunth Key to species of ser. Andinae I. Lf-formula iv-xv/10-20.
2.
Larger lfts 1.6-2.7(-3) mm; replum of pod unarmed; s. Colombia and Ecuador 33.
M quitensis (p. 85).
2.
Larger lfts 3-5 mm; replum of pod aculeate; Peru (Ancash n. to La Libertad and Amazonas) 34.
M. weberbaueri (p. 86).
1.
Lf-formula i-iii(-iv)/6-9(-10).
3.
Lf-stks 2-4.5 cm and rachis of longer pinnae 2-4 cm; longer lfts 4.5-7.5 mm; highland Ecuador.
35.
M andina (p. 87).
3.
Lf-stks 0.35-1.2 cm and rachis of longer pinnae 0.4-1.2 cm; longer lfts 2 — 4 mm; n.-centr. and n. Peru, lat. 5°-10°S ... 36.
M. montana (p. 88).
33.
Mimosa quitensis Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 408.
1842.—"Ravines round Quito, [Francis] //^//.''-Holotypus, Hall49, K(hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1932 (top right).—Mimosopsis quitensis (Bentham) Britton & Rose in Britton & Killip, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 35: 154.
1936.
M. quitensis sensu Bentham, 1875: 427.
Microphyllidious, openly branched arborescent shrubs 1-3 m, erratically armed on prominent intemodal ribs (but not on lf-stks) with stout, widely ascending broad-based aculei 3-8 mm, the young stems, If-axes and peduncles pilosulous with grayish hairs ±0.15-0.3 mm mixed with livid granules, the lvs olivaceous subconcolorous, the plane thick-textured lfts glabrous above, usually puberulent beneath on side anterior to midrib, sometimes overall, the globose capitula in praefloration pseudoracemose at end of homotinous branchlets, becoming axillary to coeval or hysteranthous lvs, the pods immersed in foliage.
Stipules erect subulate-setiform (1-) 1.5-5(-6) X 0.3-0.5 mm, puberulent dorsally, obscurely 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (1.5-) 2-5(-6.5) cm, the petiole 5-11 x 0.5-0.8 mm, the longer interpiimal segments 3-5 mm, the deep ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs and charged between most of them (at least the first, often all) with a weak spicule to 0.3 mm; pinnae (5-)6-l 2(-l 3)-jug., not or scarcely graduated, the rachis (5-)7-l 7(-l 9) mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.4-0.9 mm; lfts of longer piimae (11-) 12-18(-20)-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the blades narrowly oblong or oblong-eUiptic from obtusangulate base, obtuse or minutely apiculate, the larger ones 1.6-2.7(-3) x 0.5-0.8 mm, (2-)2.7-4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath weakly 1-2-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib only a little forwardly displaced, the posterior nerve short or 0.
Peduncles 10-26 mm, some early ones often solitary, the rest 2- 4 per node; capitula without filaments 6.5-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse flbuds glabrous; bracts linear or linear-oblanceolate 0.5-1.1 X 0.1-0.2 mm puberulent; y/ow^r^ 5-merous 10-androus greenish-white, mostly bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 1-1.4 x 0.8-1.1 mm, the shallowly undulate rim microscopically ciliolate; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 3.3-3.8 mm, the narrowly ovate or lanceolate subacute, distally flaring lobes 1.2-1.5 x 0.5- 0.85 mm; filaments white or cream-colored, united only at extreme base, exserted 4-5 mm.
Pods solitary or to 10 per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately Unear, gently incurved (30-)40- 70 X 6-8 mm, (5-)6-8-seeded, the shallowly constricted or almost straight replum 0.6-1 mm wide, the papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, at first puberulent and granular overall becoming brown glabrate venulose, in dehiscence separating from replum along dorsal (convex) margin and inertly gaping to release the seeds, the cavity continuous; seeds obliquely basipetal, strongly compressed ±4 x 2.5-3.2 mm, the castaneous testa smooth, the pleurogram ±1.5 mm wide.
In matorral and forming thickets on stony quebrada slopes and on roadsides, locally plentiful between 1300 and 2850 m in intermontane and Pacific valleys of the equatorial Andes in lat. 2°30'N-0°30'S, from Popayan in El Cauca, Colombia s. to neighborhood of Quito in Pichincha, Ecuador. —Fl. spasmodically throughout the year. —Guarango, applied also to M. andina and to some armed species of Acacia.
Map 6.
34.
Mimosa weberbaueri Harms, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 42: 90.
1908.-"Pem: Dep.
Amazonas, prope Chachapoyas, alt. 2400-2500 m (WEBERBAUER n. 4321.-JuU 1904)."-Holotypus, ^B = FNeg.
14441; clastotypus (fragm.), F 6097811 M. dichoneuta Macbride, Publ. Field Columbian Mus., Bot. Ser. 8: 90.
1930.-"Peru: Gravelly river bluffs, Huaraz, Dept. of Ancash, Oct. 6, 1922, Macbride & Featherstone 2523.''-Holotypus, F! = FNeg.
54827 = NY Neg. 11898.
M. dichoneuta and M. weberbaueri sensu Macbride, 1943: 88, 96.
Microphyllidious shrubs 1-2 m with stiff virgate branches, armed on low ribs of most internodes and randomly on lf-stks with stout broadbased recurved castaneous aculei 1-8 mm, the brown or purplish homotinous stems along with foliage and peduncles pubemlent with fine gray hairs less than 0.3 mm intermixed with reddish granules, the plane thin-textured lfts a shade paler and a little more densely puberulent beneath than above or sometimes glabrous on upper face, the oblong-ellipsoid capitula solitary or more often 2-3-nate either in a long series of If-axils, when on peduncle shorter than associated If-stk, or in early anthesis pseudoracemose.
Stipules stiflly erect setiform 2-7 x 0.3-0.5 mm, dorsaUy puberulent, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-7 cm, the petiole including pulvinus 7-16 x 0.6-0.8 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 4-12(-14) mm, the shallow ventral groove bridged between most pinna-pairs and between some charged with a minute spicule; pinnae 4-9(-10)-jug., either subequilong or a little descrescent proximally, the rachis of distal ones 11-23 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.8-2 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 10-15- jug., either decrescent proximally or subequilong, the first pair 0.2-0.9 mm distant from deflexed subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.5 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from obtusangulate base, either obtuse or deltately subacute, the longer ones 3-5 x 0.8-1.8 mm, all veinless above, weakly 1 -nerved beneath, the midrib nearly centric, almost immersed.
Peduncles 15-25 mm, some with a minute aculeus; capitula without filaments 9-14(-22) x 6-7 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds glabrous or thinly minutely pubemlent at tip; bracts linear-oblanceolate ± 1 mm, dorsalUy puberulent, deciduous; flowers 5-merous 10-androus, apparently aU bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.6-1 x 0.6-0.75 mm, the low-deltate teeth to 0.2 mm; corolla greenishwhite, narrowly vase-shaped 2-3.5 mm, the ovate, almost erect 1-nerved lobes 0.7-1.1 x 0.6- 0.8 mm; filaments white, monadelphous through not more than 0.5 mm, exserted 4-5 mm; ovary short-stipitate, silky-pubemlent.
Pods subsessUe, broadly linear, slightly curved, when well fertilized 50-70 X 8-9.5 mm, 6-8-seeded, the shallowly undulate replum 0.7 mm wide, aculeate mostly on dorsal rib with stout recurved aculei 1-3 mm, the densely gray-pubemlent valves tardily disjointing into free-falling articles 7-10 mm long; mature seeds not seen.
On dry rocky hillsides and in stony streambeds, apparently local in the Pemvian Andes in lat. 6°-10°S: weU known from the upper Santa valley in prov. Carhuaz and Huaraz of depto. MAP 6.
Tropical South America.
Ranges of M caesalpiniifolia Bentham, M. laticifera Rizzini, M. quitensis Bentham, M. andina Bentham, M. montana Kunth var. montana, and M. weberbaueri Harms.
Ancash, at 2800-3500 m; near Tayabamba and Santiago de Chuco in depto. La Libertad; and seemingly disjunct near 2000 m near Chachapoyas in depto. Amazonas.—FI.
IX-X, II-VI, the full cycle unknown. —5'/i/><2c; agahur.
Map 6.
In Ancash M. weberbaueri is sympatric with M. montana, but readily distinguished by larger, more elaborate leaves with aculeate leaf-stalks 2-7 (not 0.3-1.2) cm long, and by the aculeate replum and articulate valves of the pod.
It is the only known member of its group yet discovered in Amazonas.
In segregating M. dichoneuta, Macbride emphasized (Fl.
Pem, p. 85, in clave) pubemlent flowers and leaflets pubescent on both faces as differences from M. weberbaueri as then known.
However the type of M. dichoneuta has an essentially glabrous corolla, and that of M. weberbaueri has leaflets thinly puberulent above.
The fmits seem identical.
A modem collection from near Chachapoyas (Ferreyra 7102, MO) has slightly more numerous pinnae and leaflets than the material studied from Ancash, perhaps a reflection of a less austere climate, but I can find no substantial ground for recognizing two species.
35.
Mimosa andina Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 427.
1875.-"Andes of Ecuador, near Huataxi,.
.
.
Spruce, n. 6058."—Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1931; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1304, F! = F Neg. 54802, GH!,
NY!,
P!,
S! Arborescent shrubs of broad outline attaining 3-5 m, with stiff, prominently 7-ribbed, simple or few-forked annotinous branches, armed on most intemodes, principally on the infrapetiolar but sometimes also on the infrastipular ribs remote from node, with stout straight broad-based aculei 2.5-6 mm, the young growth, except for facially glabrous or subglabrous, subconcolorous olivaceous lfts, thinly pUosulous with loosely spreading-ascending paUid hairs to 0.15-0.3 mm, the globose capitula mostly axillary to coeval or partly to hysteranthous lvs, briefly exserted from foliage in praefloration or in early anthesis but the fruits immersed in foUage.
Stipules stiffly erect lance-subulate 1-4 x 0.3-0.8 mm, strongly 1 -nerved dorsally, long persistent.
Leaf-stalks of major lvs 2-4.5 cm, the petiole 1-2.4 cm, at middle 0.6-1.1 mm diam., the deep ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs and there charged with a small ascending spicule, the 1-2 interpinnal segments 8-14 mm; pinnae 2-3-jug. (of depauperate distal lvs, not further described, 1 -jug.), the further pair longest, the rachis of these 2-4 cm, the longer interfoUolar segments (2-)2.5- 4.5 mm; Ifts of longer pinnae 7-10-jug., decrescent proximally, the first pair 1-1.8 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.7 mm, the blades oblong or narrowly ovate-oblong from obtusangulate or shallowly semicordate base, obtuse or deltately subacute at apex, the longer ones 4.5-7.5 X 1.6-2.7 mm, 2.2-3.1 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath 3-nerved from pulvinule, the straight simple midrib moderately displaced, weakly prominulous or immersed and discolored, the iimer posterior nerve expiring near or short of mid-blade and well within the plane margin, the outer one very short and weak.
Peduncles solitary and fasciculate by 2-3, 5-25 mm; capitula without filaments 6-7.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid obtuse flbuds glabrous; bracts oblanceolate or obovate 0.4-1 mm, caducous;y/ow^r^ pale greenish-white, drying stramineous, 5(-6)-merous diplostemonous, some lower ones functionally staminate, their gynoecium depauperate or 0, the rest bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 1.3-1.8 mm, glabrous extemally, the deltate, sometimes microscopicaUy ciliolate teeth unequal, the deeper sinuses between them 0.15-0.5 mm; corolla narrowly funnel-shaped 2.7-3.2 mm, the erect, narrowly ovate lobes 0.9-1.3 x 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments whitish, united at base into a stemonozone 0.4-0.8 mm, the longer ones exserted (2.5-)3.5-5 mm; anthers 0.4-0.5 mm.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum sessUe, in profile broad-linear from cuneate base, deltate at apex, gently decurved, when weU fertilized 45-60 x 9-14 mm, 7-9- seeded, the smooth, shallowly or scarcely constricted replum 0.8-1.1 mm wide, the lustrous brown subcoriaceous venulose valves low-colliculate over each seed, thinly minutely puberulent appearing glabrous, when ripe separating entire from replum along dorsal side and narrowly gaping to release the seeds, the dehiscence follicular; seeds (few seen, much predated by Bruchidae) plumply comprfessed-suborbicular 4.5-5.5 mm diam., the testa fuscous dull.
On rocky hillsides and slopes of quebradas, sometimes preserved or planted along fieldstone walls or in hedges, 2150-2650 m, locally abundant but known only from the Andes of Ecuador in prov. Chimborazo, Cafiar and Azuay.—Fl.
IXIV, the fruit long persisting. —Guarango.
Map 6.
Mimosa andina resembles the Peruvian M. montana in few pinnae per leaf, but differs in leaflets twice as large and a consequently different aspect.
It is confined to a small stretch of the central Ecuadorean Andes in latitude 2°-3°S. From the vicinity of Quito northward into southem Colombia it is replaced by the closely related M. quitensis, different in higher leaf-formula and much smaller leaflets.
The flowers and pods of these Andean mimosas are similar in form, having preserved the ancestral traits of their common predecessor while the foliage, always labile in Mimosa, underwent modification in size and number of parts.
36.
Mimosa montana Kunth, Mimoses t. 10.
1819 & p. 31.
1820.-Typus infra sub var. montana indicatur.
Stiffly branched microphyllidious subarborescent shrubs flowering when 1-3 m tall, armed on the infrapetiolar rib of each intemode with a stout erect broad-based aculeus 2-5 mm, the young stems, lf-stks and peduncles finely minutely pubemlent overall, neither setose nor glandular, the olivaceous subconcolorous lfts either facially glabrous and minutely ciUolate or finely sUky-strigulose on both faces, the smaU globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary and geminate in If-axils on peduncle either longer than or about equaling the associated If.
Stipules erect subulatesetiform 0.7-2 mm, persistent.
Leafstalks 3.5- 15(-18) mm, the petiole including pulvinus 2-8 X 0.35-0.5 mm, the longer interpinnal segment(s) 1.5-5 mm, the narrow ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs and charged at least between the proximal pair with a minute spicule; pinnae of primary lvs 2-3(-^)-jug., of few depauperate lvs of axillary brachyblasts (no further described) 1-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest ones 4-12 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.4-2 mm; lfts of distal pair of pinnae 5-8(-9)-jug., a little decrescent proximaUy, the small first pair 0.2-1 mm distant from erect subulate (exceptionally foliolose) paraphyllidia 0.1-0.25(-0.7) mm, the blades oblong, narrowly oblong-obovate or obovate-eUiptic from obtusangulate base, obtuse at apex, those beyond mid-rachis attaining 2-4 x 0.6-2 mm, 2-3.4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath faintly or subobsoletely 1-nerved.
Peduncles 8- 21 mm; capitula without filaments ± 6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse pubemlent fl-buds much surpassing the minute caducous hracts; flowers 5-merous 10-androus, all or most bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.5-2 mm, the tube glabrous, the gray-puberulent teeth ±0.15 mm; corolla vase-shaped 1.9-2.3 mm, the narrowly ovate subacute, slightly flaring lobes ± 1 X 0.6 mm; filaments white or ochroleucous, united into a stemonozone ±0.2 mm, exserted 3-4(-?) mm.
Pods 1-3 per receptacle, in profile linear, nearly straight or lunately recurved (20-)25-40(-45) x 5-7 mm, at base attenuate or cuneately contracted into a stipe ±1-2 mm, abmptly cuspidate at apex, the replum 0.4-0.55 mm wide, either randomly aculeate or unarmed except for low-conic papilli corresponding to suppressed aculei, the papery low-colliculate valves often densely gray-puberulent in youth but ultimately glabrate and sublustrous, tardily and reluctantly dehiscent by separation from replum and transverse fracture between articles 4.5- 8 mm long; seeds (of var. sandemanii) ±3 mm diam., the testa castaneous lustrous.
Mimosa montana and M. andina are here constmed as vicariant sibling species that share a much reduced leaf-formula but differ consistently in ampUtude of leaves and leaflets.
The typical form of M montana, recorded from Cajamarca south to Ancash, has extremely small and narrow leaflets combined with a shallow calyx much less than half as long as the coroUa.
Three collections from Piura, described below as var. sandemanii, differ in a deeply campanulate calyx and mostly broader leaflets, features that suggest passage toward Ecuadorean M. andina.
Further coUections may demonstrate that the two species are confluent in northem Pem.
Smaller simpler leaves alone distinguish M. montana from closely related M. weberbaueri.
Key to varieties of M. montana 1.
Calyx shortly campanulate 0.5-0.6 mm, ± one third as long as corolla; pinnae of primary lvs 2- 3(-4)-jug.; lfts oblong, the larger 2-3 x 0.6-1.1 mm; Cajamarca to Ancash 36a. var. montana (p. 89).
1.
Calyx deeply campanulate 1.5-2 mm, nearly half as long as corolla; pinnae of primary lvs 1-3-jug.; lfts oblongor obovate-elliptic, the larger ones 3-4 x 1.2-2 mm; Huancabamba valley in e. Piura 36b. var. sandemanii (p. 89).
36a. Mimosa montana Kunth var. montana.
M. montana Kunth, 1820, I.e., sens. str.—"Crescit prope Caxamarca in Andibus Pemvianorum, altitudine 1470 hexapodamm [±2650 m]."
— Holotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland s.n.,
P-HBK! M. brevifolia Humboldt ex K. Sprengel, Syst. veg. 2: 205.
1825, nom. subnud.,
apparently not intended by the author as sp. nov.—"Amer. austr."
—Sprengel's specimen is presumably B-WILLD 19070, seen in Microform!-Equated with M. montana by Macbride, 1943: 90.
M. montana sensu Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, 1824: 259; Bentham, 1875: 427.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In dry thickets on stony hillsides and at edge of fields, 2100-3100 m, local in dry inter-Andean valleys between 1° and 10°S in n.-centr. Peru, from Cajamarca s. to the Santa valley in Ancash.-H. III-V(-?).
Map 6.
36b. Mimosa montana Kunth var. sandemanii Bameby, var. nov., a var. montana praesertim calyce profunde campanulato ± 1.5-2 (nec 0.5- 0.6) mm longo dimidiae coroUae aequilongo, ulterius foUorum pinnis plerisque 1- vel 1-2-, paucissimis 3-jugis foliolisque pauUo latioribus (majoribus 1.2-2, nec 0.6-1.2 mm latis) diversa.—Peru.
Piura: Huancabamba, very frequent in semi-xerophytic conditions, Aug. 1943 (fl & fr), C. Sandeman 4277.-Holotypus, F= NY Neg. 11902.
M. montana sensu Harms, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 18: 233.
1922 (Weberbauer 60671).
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In hUlside thickets, 1800-2200 m, known only from valley of rio Huancabamba in depto. Piura, P e m . - n .
IV-VIII(-?).
B(iii).
Series A C A N T H O C A R P AE Bentham Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Acanthocarpae Bentham.
M. sect. Ameria ser. Acanthocarpae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 408.
1842.-Sp. lectotypica: M. acanthocarpa Willdenow = M. aculeaticarpa Ortega. —M. sect. Habbasia ser. Acanthocarpae Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 424.
1875, minore ex parte.
Mimosopsis Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 174, pro gen.
1928.—Sp. typica: M. prolifica (S. Watson) Britton & Rose = Mimosa grahamii var. prolifica (S. Watson) Bameby.
Acanthopteron Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 179, pro gen.
1928.—Sp. unica: A. laceratum (Rose) Britton = Mimosa lacerata Rose.
Shrubs and treelets mostly 0.5-5(-6) m but M. minutifolia suffruticose ±1.5-5 dm, armed at some or all nodes with 1-2 ascending-recurved infrastipular aculei at times accompanied by one downwardly displaced infrapetiolar one, the Ifaxes also potentially aculeolate.
Indumentum of fine incurved puberulence or of short erect hairs, these commonly mixed with granular trichomes, sometimes almost 0, the stems and If-axes of M. galeottii hispidly setose.
Stipules commonly subulate-setiform (0.5-) 1-7 mm, 1 -nerved or extemally nerveless, in few spp. ligulate and to 3-nerved.
Leaf-formula i-xxvi/2-24, the sulcus of If-stk either continuous or bridged between pinna-pairs, espiculate, the longest lfts (0.6-)l- 10 mm, mostly 1-2-nerved dorsally, the venation weak, the midrib branched in M. aspera and M. grahamii.
Inflorescence commonly a foliate pseudoraceme of globose or hemispherical capitula, in M. nanchititlana of amentiform spikes, bome in the axil of coeval lvs along homotinous long-shoots, but in M. lacerata fasciculate on brachyblasts from annotinous branches, the sessile or subsessUe flowers 5-, seldom 4- or randomly 4-5-merous, normally all diplostemonous; calyx 0.5-2.2 mm, minutely denticulate, ±yA-y2 as long as corolla, this 2-4(-4.8) mm, either glabrous or pubemlent; filaments usually obscurely united at base to corolla, either whitish or pink-lilac.
Pods (unknown in M. zimapanensis) either sessile or shortly stipitate, the body in profile linear or linear-oblong 3.5-8(-ll) mm wide, straight or falcate, often sinuously constricted between the (3-)4-8(-9) seeds, the replum less than 1 mm wide, the papery valves either low-colliculate over each seed or elevated lengthwise in a median ridge, separating from replum in one piece, the whole either glabrous or densely puberulent, the replum smooth, or retro-aculeate, or setose-setaculeate, the setaculei in M. lacerata coalescent into a broad wing, the valves commonly smooth, in several spp. granular and glutinous, in few spp. hispidly setose.
Spp. 13, of seasonally dry or desert habitats, widespread from s.-e. Arizona to centr. Texas, s. over the Mexican Plateau and through upland s. Mexico to Chiapas, 4 on the w. slope and foothills of Sa.
Madre Occidental between s. Sonora and s.-w. Durango.
The five (herein reinterpreted as three) species of the present ser. Acanthocarpae known to Bentham in 1875 formed a small part of a much more comprehensive series of the same name that included the ser. Revolutae, Acantholobae, Andinae and Boreales of this work.
As here delimited, and incorporating thirteen (two imperfectly known) species, ser. Acanthocarpae is most closely akin to Andinae and Boreales.
It differs from Andinae, which have similar valvately dehiscent fmits, in espiculate leaf-stalks and North American dispersal; and from the two Boreales that have similar pods (M. zygophylla and M. texana) in primarily infrastipular cauline aculei.
AU Boreales bear flowers from brachyblasts on annotinous branchlets, a xeromorphic mode of ramification that appears in Acanthocarpae only in M. lacerata and the imperfectly known species no. 43, of which the aflinity is uncertain.
The winged fmit of M. lacerata, which in other respects seems very closely akin to M. acanthocarpa, suggests a relationship to M. bahamensis, but the replar wing common to these otherwise dissimilar species may have arisen independently.
Members of ser. Acanthocarpae obviously related to M. aculeaticarpa but anomalous in the semble some Boreales in foliage, but have inseries by one or two particular characters are: M. frastipular aculei and valvate dehiscence of the lacerata, with bimodal branching-pattern and series. winged pod; M. nanchititlana with spicate partial AU Acanthocarpae of relatively wide dispersal inflorescence; and M. galeottii with hispidly seappear to consist of a mosaic of minutely differtose stems and leaf-stalks.
The small subgroup entiated races and present problems in classifiof Acanthocarpae with diminished leaf-formula cation that are as yet far from solution, native to extratropical north-western Mexico reConspectus of ser. Acanthocarpae Mimosa * Pinnae of primary lvs multijugate; partial inflorescences from contemporary If-axils; fls spicate.
37. nanchititlana R. Grether & Bameby ** As the preceding, but fls capitate.
38. aculeaticarpa Ortega a. variant 1 b. variant 2 c. var. biuncifera (Bentham) Bameby d. variant 4 39. galeottii Bentham 40. grahamii A. Gray a. var. grahamii b. var. prolifica (S. Watson) Bameby 41. minutifolia B. L. Robinson *** Pinnae multijugate and fls capitate, but partial inflorescence from brachyblasts.
Replum often winged by confluent setaculei.
42. lacerata Rose **** Pinnae of primary lvs 6-jug. or less;flscapitate; partial inflorescence axillary except for the next-following.
43. sp. (Sonora) 44. aspera M. E. Jones 45. barrancana Gentry 46. moniliformis (Britton & Rose) R. Grether & Bameby 47. gentryi Bameby 48. pringlei S. Watson a. var. pringlei b. var. graminetorum Bameby 49. zimapanensis Britton & Rose Key to species of ser. Acanthocarpae 1.
Pinnae of larger (primary) lvs 6-24-jug. 2.
Fls spicate, the floral axis at least 3 cm; s.-w. state of Mexico 37.
M. nanchititlana (p. 92).
2.
Fls capitate, the floral axis less than 1 cm.
3.
Stems hispidly setaculeate overall; w. tropical and s. Mexico 39.
M. galeottii (p. 97).
3.
Stems pubemlent or glabrate, nowhere setose.
4.
Small subshmbs (1.5-6 dm) of upper Santiago basin in Jalisco and adj. states, with proportionately long and narrow lvs, the lf-formula x-xxiv/16-22, the rachis of longer pinnae only 4-10(-12) mm and lfts only 0.6-1.5 mm; pod hispid overall with straight setaculei 41.
M. minutifolia (p. 99).
4.
Either small or tall shmbs and treelets, when as low as the preceding the pinnae fewer, or longer, or both, and the larger lfts in any case 2 mm and more.
5.
Capitula afl axillary to coeval lvs on homotinous long-shoots; replum of pod either unarmed or discretely aculeate.
6.
Calyx 1-2.2 mm, ± half as long as coroUa; extremely widespread over Mexico and s.- w. United States.
7.
Lfts strongly nerved dorsally; lf-stks wefl developed, the longer interpinnal segments 5-14 cm; planaltine Mexico e. of Sa.
Madre Occidental from extreme n. Jalisco n. into s.-e. Arizona and s.-w. New Mexico 40.
M. grahamii (p. 98).
7.
Lfts faintly 1-2-nerved dorsally; lf-stks highly variable, but in the range of the last the pinnae crowded along rachis at intervals less than 5 mm; s.-w. United States s.-ward to Chiapas 38.
M aculeaticarpa (p. 94).
6.
Calyx less than 1 mm long; w. slope and foothiUs of Sa.
Madre Occidental in s. Sonora, adj. Chihuahua, s.-w. Durango and Sinaloa; proceed to couplet 11.
5.
Capitula bome on brachyblasts along annotinous branches; replum of pod densely setaculeate, the basally dilated setae commonly confluent into a broad continuous, lacerately toothed wing; calyx less than 1 mm; upland e. Mexico from Queretaro to Oaxaca, w. into Guerrero 42.
M lacerata (p. 100).
1.
Pinnae of larger lvs 1-6-jug. 8.
Longer lf-stks 20-80 mm, bearing 3-6 pairs of pinnae.
9.
Lf-stks 8-12 cm and rachis of longer pinnae ±5 cm; lfts coriaceous; pod in profile narrowly oblong ±30 X 7-9 mm, hispidly setaculeate overafl; imperfectly known sp. of JaUsco-Nayarit borders near 21°N 44.
M. aspera (p. 101).
9.
Lf-stks 2-5 cm and rachis of longer pinnae 1-2 cm; lfts thin-textured; pod in profile undulately linear 30-75 x 4-5.5 mm, the replum either smooth or aculeate but the valves never hispid.
10.
Calyx 1-2 mm, ± half as long as corolla; lfts less than 3 mm; replum of pod aculeate; mostly e. of crest of Sa.
Madre Occidental; paucipinnate forms of: .. .. 38.
M aculeaticarpa (p. 94).
10.
Calyx less than 1 mm, one third or less as long as corolla; longer lfts 3-10 mm; replum of pod smooth; s. Sonora and adj. Chihuahua s. to Sinaloa and adj. Durango, on the Pacific slope.
11.
Lfts of longer pinnae 7-10-jug; pod when wefl fertilized 50-76 mm long, deeply constricted between seeds from both sutures; s. Sonora and adj. Chihuahua near 27°N. .. 46.
M. moniliformis (p. 102).
11.
Lfts of longer pinnae 4-6-jug.; pod when wefl fertilized 35-50 mm long, shallowly constricted or almost straight; near Durango-Sinaloa state line at ±25'*N .... 45.
M. barrancana (p. 102).
8.
Longer lf-stks 1-18 mm, bearing 1-3 pairs of pinnae.
12.
Peduncles all (or almost all) arising from the axil of coeval lvs; one sp. on w. slope of the Sa.
Madre Occidental at 900 m upward, the rest on the e. slope or on Sa.
Madre Oriental.
13.
Virgate shmbs 2-3 m of Sa.
Madre Occidental at 900—1300 m; fl-buds obovoid glabrous.
47.
M. gentryi (p. 103).
13.
Stiffly branched xeromorphic shmbs either of e. slope of Sa.
Madre Occidental at 1500- 2000 m, or of Sa.
Madre Oriental in Hidalgo; fl-buds either fusiform, or pubemlent, or both.
14.
Corollas all or almost all 5-merous, hispidulous extemally; Sa.
Madre Occidental and adj. piedmont 48.
M pringlei (p. 104).
14.
Corollas (so far as known) 4-merous, glabrous (lobes papillate at tip); Sa.
Madre Oriental in Hidalgo 49.
M zimapanensis (p. 105).
12.
Peduncles arising from brachyblasts along annotinous branchlets; low hills of the coastal plain of Sonora 43.
M sp. (p. 101).
37.
Mimosa nanchititlana R. Grether & Barciliolate, the fl-spikes axillary to and surpassed neby, Brittonia 39: 345, fig. 1.
1987.—"Mexby coevally expanded lvs on contemporary ico.
Mexico: Distrito Tejupilco, 1.5 km de branchlets.
5^//7w/^5 papery brownish, some lowHormigueros, Nanchititla, 9 Apr 1973, M. er ones ovate, the rest ligulate (3-)4-7(-10) x Sousa 406)0."—Holotypus, MEXU; isotypi, 0.6-1.2(-2) mm, mostly obtuse, glabrate venNY, US. trally and weakly several-nerved, tomentulose at tip.
Leaf-formula (vi-)vii-xi(-xiv)/17-25, the IfAmply foUate microphyllidious shrubs or treestks (5-)6-l 0(-l 3) cm, the petiole and interpinlets 2-5 m, randomly armed at nodes with a pair nal segments ±6-12 mm, the ventral sulcus conof horizontal, straight infrastipular aculei 6.5-9 tinuous (spicules 0); rachis of longer pinnae 2- mm and on dorsal rib of some lf-stks with sub- 5(-6) cm; lfts linear-oblong or falcately lanceolate horizontal ones to 3 mm, the homotinous from semicordate base, the longer ones 3.5-7.5 branchlets, If-axes and peduncles densely hispid- (-9) =x 0.8-1.6(-2) mm, 3.5^.3 times as long as ulous with stiffly erect whitish hairs 0.2-0.5 mm, wide, all veinless above, beneath weakly l(-2)- the crowded subconcolorous lfts faciaUy glabrous nerved from pulvinule, the midrib only a little 2 mm.
Icm.
FIG. 3.
Mimosa nanchititlana Grether-G. & Bameby.
A. Flowering branchlet.
B. Leaflet, ventral (left) and dorsal (right) views.
C. Rower + bract.
D. Fruiting spike.
E. Pods, with smooth and armed replum.
F. Seeds. (A-C from Hinton 4387; D, E (top), F from Hinton 8889; E (bottom) from Hinton 7337.) displaced, the posterior nerve when present very short.
Spikes solitary and geminate, without filaments 5-6 mm diam., the axis including peduncle 4.5-8.5 cm, the fls subhorizontal sessile, the fl-buds claviform, minutely puberulent at tip; bracts oblanceolate ± 1 mm, caducous; flowers 5-merous 10-androus, all bisexual; calyx campanulate, relatively firm and brownish, (0.7-)0.9- 1.3 mm, faintly 5-nerved, thinly hispidulous overall or above middle, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.1-0.2 mm; corolla 2-2.6 mm, the ascending, subinvolute lobes 0.8-0.9 x 0.4-0.5 mm; filaments white (?), united only at extreme base to corolla, exserted ±4 mm.
Pods several per spike, sessile, in profile linear, nearly straight ±20-40 X 5-7 mm, (3-)5-8-seeded, the replum ±0.6 mm thick, either unarmed or armed along each suture with erect, apically recurved, laterally compressed, thinly pilosulous aculei ±1-6 mm, the valves umbonulate over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely pilosulous and reddish-granular overall, the valves separating from replum in one piece.
On open hillsides, sometimes in pine and fir forest, 1340-3400 m, apparently endemic to s.- w. state of Mexico (distr.
Temascaltepec and Tejupilco), Mexico.—Fl. \Y-Y\\l.—Espino.
Mimosa nanchititlana is unique in the syndrome of spicate flowers and valvately dehiscent pods.
In leaf-formula it is like M. galeottii, but lacks the armament of hispid setaculei.
Young flowering specimens are likely to be sought among the tasselled ser. Leiocarpae, but the close relationship of the species to so-called Mimosopsis can hardly be questioned.
38.
Mimosa aculeaticarpa [Gomez] Ortega, Nov. pi. descr. dec.
10: 134.
1800, sensu extenso.— Typus infra sub titulo "variant 1" inquiritur.
Stiffly widely, sometimes intricately branched shrubs and treelets at maturity 0.5-5 m (generally less than 2 dm in U.S. and extratropical Mexico, potentially taller s.-ward), armed at most nodes with 1 or commonly 2, horizontal and recurved or less often straight and then either horizontal or ascending, infrastipular aculei 3-12(-l 5) mm, the old stems fuscous or striped and commonly flexuous, the homotinous stems, If-axes and peduncles either puberulent or pilosulous with accumbent or erect hairs to 0.1-0.3 mm ordinarily mixed with livid granules, the usually small and crowded or lubricated lfts either glabrous or pubemlent facially, ciliolate, the globose capitula solitary, geminate, or fasciculate, mostly along homotinous long-shoots in the axil of coeval lvs, but rarely (in desert climate n.-ward) some randomly fasciculate on brachyblasts, pseudoracemose only in praefloration, the often abundant fruits maturing well below branch-tips.
Stipules setiform 1-5 mm, 1-nerved or obscurely nerved, becoming dry fragile.
Leaf-formula highly variable, iii-xviii/(7-)8-17(-20), the lvs associated with peduncles sometimes smaller than those below, the If-stk (unarmed or randomly aculeolate dorsally) 1-10(-11) cm, the petiole either ± as long as first interpinnal segment or reduced to pulvinus, the ventral sulcus continuous (spicules 0); rachis of longer pinnae (4-)5-30 mm, the lfts oblong, oblong-eUiptic, or linear-oblong, obtuse or subapiculate, the longer ones (1.3-)l .8-8(-10) X 0.7-3.5 mm, ±2.2^(-4.4) times as long as wide, weakly or faintly 1-2-nerved dorsally, the scarcely displaced midrib immersed or weakly prominulous.
Peduncles 5-25 mm; capitula without filaments (4-)4.5-7.5(-8) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the narrowly obovoid or clavate fl-buds either gray-puberulent or glabrous, greenish or reddish-tinged;y/ow^r^ sessile, 5-merous 10-androus (randomly 4-merous), the proximal ones often smaller than the bisexual distal ones; calyx campanulate, often deeply so and slightly ampliate beyond middle, either glabrous or pubemlent distally and ciliolate, that of longer fls l-2(-2.2) mm, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.05-0.3 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped, the longer ones of a capitulum (2-)2.2-3.5(-3.8) mm, the suberect lobes 0.6-1 mm, either glabrous or densely puberulent extemally; filaments white or whitish, united at very base to the corolla, exserted 2.5-5 mm.
Pods 1-10 per capitulum, sessile or almost so, in profile undulately linear and then often falcate, or linear-oblong and then often straight or less arcuate, when fully mature 20-50 x 3.5-8(-l 1) mm, the replum less than 1 mm wide, either unarmed, or randomly armed on dorsal nerve, particularly along the abaxial suture but sometimes on both, with broad-based retro-arcuate or almost straight aculei 1-3.5 mm, the stiffly papery, redor purple-brown valves low-coUiculate over 3-7(-8) seeds, either permanently pubemlent, or glabrous, or rarely densely pUosulous, at least thinly and often densely granular (then becoming resinous and lustrous), finaUy separating in one piece along the convex abaxial suture and narrowly gaping to release the strongly compressed seeds, but fracture lines between seeds sometimes faintly visible.
The broad definition of M. aculeaticarpa embodied in the foregoing description is only marginally more comprehensive than that proposed by McVaugh (1987: 198-200), who has ably demonstrated the continuous modes of variation that link the smallerand simpler-leaved plants of the Mexican Plateau and southwestern United States (=M. biuncifera of modem authors) with the often taller, more amply and more elaborately foliate plants of tropical Mexico known to Bentham as M. acanthocarpa and more recently either as M. aculeaticarpa or M. rhodocarpa.
From the small sample then available, Bentham (1841-1842) in his first revision of Mimosa spoke of M. biuncifera as "perhaps too close to M. acanthocarpa, but looks different"; this different look has become increasingly difficult to particularize as more is learned about variation between populations.
Independently of the foliage characters the fruits vary considerably in length, width, curvature, and in armament and depth of constriction of the replum; while independently of the pod the flowers vary from densely graypuberulent to glabrous.
At the periphery of the whole range of M. aculeaticarpa sens, lat., for example in the northem Chihuahuan Desert, in Sa.
Madre Oriental, and in Chiapas, the known populations are relatively stable morphologically and have perceptible individuality; but on the slopes of the Transverse Volcanic Range in Mexico the characters that contribute to a distinctive syndrome in the peripheral populations appear in random combinations, from which no stable formula can be extracted.
The problem presented by these forms cannot be solved in a herbarium study, and I therefore present here only a tentative outline of one possible classification, leaving for the future a detailed intraspecific one.
For the same reason I propose no changes in the nomenclature, except in the case of M. biuncifera, for which an appropriate combination is required for the United States flora.
Nevertheless I regard the four variants, with their clusters of synonyms, as equivalent in taxonomic status to varieties recognized elsewhere in this work.
The key that follows mirrors the major trends in the complex, but does not accommodate all the minor variants known in nature.
It must be bome in mind that small specimens that show only inflorescences or only young growth may mislead as to the real dimensions and leaf-formula of mature foliage.
Key to major variants of M. aculeaticarpa Lf-stks of mature primary lvs 3.5-10(-l 1) cm, bearing 8-18 pairs of pinnae; widespread through mountainous southern Mexico, s.-ward from the s. edge of the Central Plateau to Chiapas, n. along Sa.
Madre Oriental to Nuevo Le6n. 2.
Lfts relatively ample and distant along the pinna-rachis, the larger ones attaining 3.5-9(-10) x (1-) 1.5-3.5 mm and inserted 1.5-5 mm apart; corolla commonly glabrous; pod linear-oblong 5-11 mm wide, not or only shallowly or randomly constricted between seeds, the replum either unarmed or weakly armed 38a. variant 1 (p. 96).
2.
Lfts relatively small and crowded along the pinna-rachis, the larger ones less than 3.5 x 1.5 mm and inserted at intervals less than 1.5 mm; corolla commonly but not consistently pubemlent, at least at tip oflobes; pod linear, 3.5-5(-6) mm diam., usually at once falcate and undulately constricted, almost always armed on one or both margins; s.-centr. and s.-w. Mexico 38b. variant 2 (p. Lf-stks of mature primary lvs l-3(-3.5) cm, bearing 3-9(-10) pairs of pinnae; Mexican Plateau s. to Valley of Mexico, n. into s.-w. United States.
4.
Pod falcately linear and undulately constricted between seeds, mostly 3.5-5 mm broad at widest point; range as just given (=var. biuncifera) 38d. var. biuncifera (p. 97).
4.
Pod linear-oblong straight, not constricted between seeds, 6-8 mm wide; local in s. S. Luis Potosi, n. Jahsco, and perhaps Aguascalientes 38c. variant 3 (p. 96).
96).
38a. Mimosa aculeaticarpa Ortega variant 1 (typical).
M. aculeaticarpa Ortega, 1800, I.e., sens, str.—""Habitat in Nova Hispania.
Floret in H[orto] R[egio] Mat[ritensi].
.
. e seminibus missis per D. Sesse."
—Cultivated specimens dated 1801 and July 1815 (MA!) are presumably authentic and are candidates for neotypus.—^c^ada aculeaticarpa (Ortega) Lagasca, Gen. sp. pi. 16.
1816.
Mimosopsis aculeaticarpa (Ortega) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 176.
1928.
Acacia acanthocarpa Willdenow, Enum. pi. 1057.
1809.—"M/mo5fl aculeatocarpa.
Hortulan[omm]... Habitat.. . ."—Described from a plant cultivated under glass at Berlin = B-WILLD 19193 (a foliate branchlet + detached fmits), seen in Microform! — Equated by Poiret, 1817, by Reichenbach, 1825, and by Bentham, 1842, with Mimosa aculeaticarpa Ortega, with which it is plausibly linked by the horticultural epithet quoted in the protologue, and therefore supposed to be derived from seed, or progeny of seed, sent to Spain by Sesse, the origin being recorded by Lagasca (1816) as Nueva Espana.
Plants were grown under Willdenow's name also at Copenhagen (Homemann, Hort. reg. hafn.
449.
1813) and at Dresden (Reichenbach, Iconogr. bot. exot.
47, tab.
63) before 1825.
Reichenbach's coloredfigureshows flowers as well as pods.
His description, in which he traces the plant's origin to Tenerife in the Canary Islands (a way-station from Mexico), calls for leaves attaining 7.5 cm, lfts 6 x 2 mm, and a pod 50 x 8 mm, displayed in thefigureas irregularly falcate and constricted (much as the pods in herb.
Willdenov.).
The leaves are comparable to those ofjuvenile shoots of variant 1 of this account, and fruit is of the width expected, but more strongly falcate than that of most wild specimens.—M/mc>5^ acanthocarpa (Willdenow) Poiret, Encycl. suppl. 5: 529.
1817, comb, illeg.; Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 409.
1842.
Mimosa acanthocarpa var. desmanthocarpa B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 36:472.1901.-"Collected by E. W. Nelson between San Cristobal and Teopisca, Chiapas, Mexico, altitude 2,060-2,620 m, 4 December, 1895, no. 3428."-Holotypus, US!; clastotypus, GHl; isotypus, NY!—M. aculeaticarpa var. desmanthocarpa (B. L. Robinson) Macbr.,
Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 11.
1919.
Mimosopsis desmanthocarpa (B. L. Robinson) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. n. 23(3): 177.
1928.
Mimosopsis rhodocarpa Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 175.
1928.-"Patamban, Michoacan, altitude 1950 to 2400 meters, January, 1903, [E. W.] Nelson 6550. "
— Holotypus, NYl—Mimosa rhodocarpa (Britton & Rose) R. Grether, J. Amold Arbor.
68: 320.1987.
Mimosopsis orizabensis Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. H. 23(3): 177.
1928.-"Engenio, Campos, Orizaba, 1953, F. Mueller 996."
- Two syntypi, both numbered 996, NY! = NY Negs.
9343, 9344.
The nomenclaturally typical variant ofM. aculeaticarpa, which corresponds with McVaugh's variant no. 2, is most distinctively developed at middle elevations in Sa.
Madre Oriental between Nuevo Leon and central Veracruz, where the pinnae and relatively ample leaflets are consistently well-spaced along their common axes and the flower is glabrous.
Southward from Puebla the leaflets are or tend to become smaller and more crowded and the foUage there resembles that of the variant next foUowing, but the pods and glabrous flowers are essentially unchanged (here belongs the minor variant "var. desmanthocarpa"").
The type of M. rhodocarpa has an exceptionally wide pod (to ± 1 cm), but seems not otherwise different.
In bmsh woodland and on open slopes or in thickets in the oak-pine belt, scattered in mountainous e. Mexico from Nuevo Le6n and adj. Tamaulipas to Chiapas, w. intermptedly in the Transverse Volcanic Range to n. Michoacan.
38b. Mimosa aculeaticarpa variant 2.
Mimosopsis moreliensis Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 178.
1928.—"Cerro de las Nalgas, near Morelia, Michoacan, September 9,1909, BrotherArsene 26^6."-Holotypus, NY! = NY Neg. 9345.-Mimosa moreliensis (Britton & Rose) Bullock, Bull. Misc.
Inform.
1939: 2.
1939.
Mimosopsis chapalensis Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 178.
1928.-"Lake Chapala, Jalisco, October 19, 1895, Pringle 6/99."-Holotypus, NY! This variant combines the small crowded leaflets and slender, undulate, falcate fruit of var. biuncifera with the relatively long leaf-stalks of typical aculeaticarpa.
The flower varies from glabrous to pubemlent.
It is equivalent to variants 1 and 3, at least in great part, of McVaugh, 1987: 199-200, but not precisely coextensive with either.
In submontane oakwoods, and thickets in grassland-transition, sometimes forming extensive associations, widespread in s.-w. Mexico, at the edge of the Plateau intergrading with var. biuncifera, in Michoacan with variant 1.
38c. Mimosa aculeaticarpa variant 3.
Mimosa aculeaticarpa "noteworthy" variant McVaugh, Rora novo-galic.
5: 200.
1987: McVaugh 18720, from s.-w. of Ojuelos, MICH! Leaf-formula of var. biuncifera, but densely loosely pilosulous, and pod linear-oblong (as often in variant 1), 6-8 mm wide, the replum straight, the valves densely gray-pubemlent and granular.
In matorral around the s. edge of the Mexican Plateau in s. San Luis Potosi, n. Jalisco, and perhaps adj. Aguascalientes.
This variant was first collected 1878-1879 by J. G. Schaffner (598, NY) and Parry & Palmer (217, NY, in part, mixed with M. texana).
These early collections were assigned by Britton to M. aculeaticarpa, and latterly (in part) by Grether (annot.,
NY) to M. minutifolia.
38d. Mimosa aculeaticarpa Ortega var. biuncifera (Bentham) Bameby, comb, nov., based on autonym generated by M. biuncifera var. lindheimeri B. L. Robinson, 1898, infra cit.
M. biuncifera Bentham, PI. hartw.
12.
1839.— ^^Hartweg 69 [in 1837]," the exact locaUty then unknown, but given later on isotypic labels as Leon, Guanajuato, Mexico.—Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = K Neg. 15531 = MICH Neg. 611; isotypi, GH! ^^>^\—Mimosopsis biuncifera Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 176.
1928.
M. lindheimeri A. Gray, Boston J. Nat. Hist. 6(2 = PL lindheim.): 181.
1850. ''[Lindheimer] 383 .. .
Rocky plateaus near New Braunfels, and on the upper Guadeloupe [Texas]."—Lectotypus (Isely, 1971b: 415), GH!; isotypus, NY!—Af. biuncifera var. lindheimeri (A. Gray) B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 328.
1898.
Mimosopsis lindheimeri (A. Gray) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 177.
1928.- Equated with M. biuncifera by Isely, 1971b: 415; maintained as a var. of M. biuncifera by Tumer, 1959: 52.
M. flexuosa Bentham in A. Gray, PL wright.
1: 62.
1852, nom. illeg.-"[C. Wright] 161 ... Mountain valleys beyond the Limpia [Texas]; Aug. [1859]."
— Holotypus presumably at K; isotypi, GH! NY!—M. biuncifera var. flexuosa (Bentham) B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 327.
1898.
Mimosopsis flexuosa (Bentham) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 176.
1928.
Mimosa warnockii B. L. Turner, Field & Lab. 24: 15.
1956; non M. flexuosa Poiret, 1810.—Interpreted as a minor variant of M biuncifera by Bameby & Isely, 1986: 122.
Mimosopsis arida Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 178.
1928.—"Santa Fe, Federal District, Mexico, September, 1927, E. Lyonnet 5."—Holotypus, US! clastotypus (fragm), NY!; isotypus, dated 1924, NY! Mimosa biuncifera glabrescens A. Gray ex Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 178.
1928. nom. nud. in syn., based on M. biuncifera var. glabrescens [a descriptive adjective, not an epithet] A. Gray, PL wright.
2: 51.
1853 [= Wright 1039, GH! NY!].
M. biuncifera sensu Isely, 1971b: 414, 1973: 100, map 29 (United States).
For discussion see Bameby & Isely, 1986.
39.
Mimosa galeottii Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 92.
1846, based on Acacia hirta Martens & Galeotti, Bull. Acad. Roy.
Sci. Bruxelles 10(9): 318 (=Enum. pL Galeotti 10: 17).
1843, nom. illeg.; non NuttaU, 1840, nec Mimosa hirta Vellozo, 1829.-"(Coll. H. Gal[eotti] No. 3165) .
.
. dans les forets de Yolotepeque (Cordillere occidentale d'Oaxaca) a 8000 pieds."
—Holotypus, BR, not seen; isotypus, K(hb. Hook.)! — Mimosopsis galeottii (Bentham) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. FI.
23(3): 175.
1928.
M. aculeaticarpa var. imparilis Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 12.
1919.-"Mexico: Los Frenos [s.-e. of Ario de Resales, Michoacan], March 20, 1898, Langlasse, 54."
—Holotypus, GH!; clastotypus (fragm), ^Y\—Mimosopsis imparilis (Macbride) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 177.
1928.
M. adenotricha sensu M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 34(3): 276.
1903; non Bentham.
Amply foliate but microphyllidious, arborescent shrubs attaining 2-5(-6) m, randomly armed at or less often shortly below nodes with one stout recurved infrapetiolar and a pair of ascending infrastipular aculei (1-)2-5 mm, the young stems and lf-stks densely hispidulous or hispid with stiff, variably oriented, yellow-brown setae to 0.5- 1.2(-1.5) mm, in addition minutely puberulent, the subconcolorous lfts usually glabrous facially but minutely ciliolate, sometimes pubemlent on both faces, the small globose or exceptionally oblong-ellipsoid capitula axillary to coeval lvs, sometimes pseudoracemose in early anthesis but the pods immersed in foliage.
Stipules 1.5-5 mm, dimorphic, those at first few nodes of a branchlet linear-lanceolate or -oblanceolate 1-3-nerved, the rest linear-setiform incurved 1 -nerved.
Leaf-formula xvi-xxvi/14-24, the If-stk of longer lvs 4- 12 cm, the true petiole almost 0, the pinna-pairs often irregularly graduated and not exactly opposite, the ventral sulcus continuous (spicules 0); rachis of longer pinnae 8-18(-20) mm, the Ifts contiguous or imbricate, the first pair next to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all elliptic or narrowly oblong-eUiptic, obscurely apiculate, the larger ones (1.2-)1.5-3.2 x 0.5-1.2 mm, 2.4-3.4(-3.8) times as long as wide, faintly l(-2)-nerved dorsally, the simple midrib only a little displaced.
Peduncles 10-22 mm; capitula without filaments 5-7(-16) X 5-7 mm, the receptacle 1.5-4(-14) mm long, the narrowly obovoid fl-buds cinereous-puberulent at tip, much shorter than the hract; flowers mostly 5-merous 10-androus and bisexual, some in some capitula randomly reduced by fusion of corolla-lobes or suppression of 1-2 stamens; calyx membranous, narrowly campanulate (1-) 1.3-1.6 mm, extemally puberulent beyond middle, the teeth 0.1-0.2 mm; coroUa narrowly vase-shaped (2-)2.4-3 mm, the lobes 0.6-1 mm, spreading-ascending and slightly thickened at tip; filaments whitish, united at very base to corolla-tube, exserted (1.5-)2-3.5 mm.
Pods 1-4 per capitulum, sessile or nearly so, in profile broad-linear, straight or subarcuate, ±20-40 X 6-8 mm, 4-7-seeded, the straight or shallowly undulate replum either remotely or closely armed with basally dilated, 1-several-seriate setaculei to 1.5-4 mm, the stiffly papery, brown valves low-umbonate over each seed, puberulent and densely granular or resinous-granular overall, either esetose or hispidly setaculeate over seeds, when ripe falling from replum in one piece.
On open slopes and in secondary brush or scrub, mostly in the oak-pine belt, (1000-)1200- 2400 m, discontinuously widespread in w. and s. Mexico: Sinaloa (near 25°N) and adj. Durango; Jalisco e. through the Balsas basin to Morelos; Oaxaca.
40.
Mimosa grahamii A. Gray, PL wright.
2: 52.
1853.—Typus infra sub var. grahamii indicatur.
Shrubs 6-20 dm, armed at most nodes with a pair of straight, widely ascending hornlike infrastipular aculei 3-10 mm and randomly on intemodes with a solitary recurved infrapetiolar one, the young stems, foliage, and usually the aculeate If-axes pilosulous with soft erect-ascending hairs 0.2-0.4 mm, exceptionally subglabrous, the pale green concolorous lfts either facially glabrous ciliolate or pilosulous on both faces, the globose capitula axillary to coeval lvs on hornotinous branchlets.
Stipules papery brownish 2-6(-12) mm, usually ligulate obtuse, incurved and 2-3-nerved distaUy, or some lower ones ovate, rarely the longer ones attenuate subsetiform.
Leaf-formula v-ix(-xii)/(7-)9-l 7(-20), the lf-stks (3-)3.5-l 1 cm, the ventral sulcus continuous (spicules 0), the pinna-pairs seldom exactly opposite; rachis of longer pinnae 12-33 mm; lfts lanceor ovate-oblong, obtuse or acute apiculate, the larger ones (2.5-)3-6(-6.5) x 1-2.1 mm, 2.2-3.5(-3.8) times as long as wide, aU veinless ventrally, dorsally 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the moderately displaced midrib pinnately 2-3-branched on each side, the inner posterior nerve brochidodrome beyond mid-blade, the venulation becoming prominulous and pallid in age.
Peduncles solitary and 2-3-nate, (1-) 1.5-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments (6-)7-9.5 mm diam., moriform, the fl-buds either glabrous or pilosulous, the clavate receptacle 1.5-4 mm long; flowers 5-merous 10-androus, sessile or almost so, all bisexual; calyx narrowly campanulate (1.2-) 1.5-2.2 mm, the minute teeth 0.1-0.2 mm, sometimes tipped with a reddish granule, the orifice otherwise either glabrous or ciliolate; corolla subtubular (3-)3.3^.8 mm, the almost erect lobes 0.8-1.2 mm, either glabrous or thinly pilosulous extemally; filaments whitish, sometimes fading cream-color, united at very base to corolla, exserted 4-6 mm.
Pods 1-7 per capitulum sessile or contracted at base into a stipe to 2 mm, in profile narrowly oblong to linear, straight or gently decurved, (15-)20-57 x 4.5-7 mm, 3-8-seeded, the stout, straight or shallowly undulate replum randomly armed with few distant erect aculei 0.5-2.5 mm, the stiffly papery, dark brown, vestigially puberulent but often densely granular valves low-umbonate over seeds, when ripe falling from replum in one piece.
In the context of its group M. grahamii is distinguished by relatively ample leaves and by prominulous dorsal venulation of the leaflets.
In the typical variety the pod is relatively short and broad, with replum not or scarcely constricted, and provides space for the seeds to lie obliquely across the cavity.
In the habitally identical M. prolifica, which is here considered only varietally distinct, the longer narrower, undulately constricted pod confines the seeds to an essentially vertical orientation.
The pubescence of foliage and flowers varies notably between populations of M. grahamii, but the less common glabrate form occurs entirely within the range of its pubescent counterpart, and intermediates between the extremes (noted as numerous by Keamey & Peebles, Arizona Rora 401.
1970, but denied by Isely, 1971b: 418) make precise definitions difficult.
Key to varieties of M. grahamii 1.
Pods 20-35 x 5.5-7 mm, the seeds obliquely basipetal; range of the species [if foliage densely pubescent, may be known as var. lemmonii]. .. 40a. var. grahamii (p. 99).
1.
Pods 45-57 X 5-5.5 mm, the seeds vertically basipetal; local in centr. Chihuahua 40b. var. prolifica (p. 99).
40a. Mimosa grahamii A. Gray var. grahamii.
M. grahamii A. Gray, 1853, I.e., sens, str.— "Mountain vaUeys of Sonora, between the San Pedro and the Sonoita, Sonora; Sept. ([C. Wright] 1042)."-Holotypus, GH!; isotypus, NY! —Mimosopsis grahamii (A. Gray) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. H. 23(3): 178.
1928.
M. lemmonii A. Gray, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 19: 76.
1883.—"S.
Arizona, Lemmon, in a canon near Fort Huachuca, in flower.
.
. and Cave Canon, in fruit."
— Syntypi, GH!; presumed isotypi, Lemmon s.n.,
dated "1883" (fl, fr), NY! Lemmon 2692, US! Mimosopsis lemmonii (A. Gray) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 176.
1928.
Mimosa grahamii var. lemmonii (A. Gray) Keamey & Peebles, J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 29: 482.
1939.
M. endlichii Harms, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 18: 93.
1922.—"Chihuahua, westlich von Rio San Juan ... 1700m... IV.1906."-Holotypus,E«^//c/z 1256, +B; phototypus + fragm, US!; clastotypus, fragm, NY!—Equated with Mimosopsis lemmonii by Britton « f e Rose, 1928: 176.
Mimosopsis durangensis Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 175.
1928.-"NearHuasemote, Durango, August 15 [fr], 1897, [/.
A^.] Rose 5^97."-Holotypus, US!; clastotypus, fragm.,
NY! Stems, lvs and fls varying from softly graypuberulent overall to nearly glabrous; otherwise as in key to varieties.
In open stony places and on rocky stream banks, in oak woodland and desert grassland, 1150-1850 m, scattered along the e. foothills and lower slopes of Sa.
Madre Occidental from Durango n. through Chihuahua to n.-e. Sonora, thence n. in United States to s.-e. Arizona and s.-w. New Mexico (Isely, 1973, map 31).—Fl.
IV-VIII. 40b. Mimosa grahamii A. Gray var. prolifica (S. Watson) Bameby, stat. nov. M. prolifica S. Watson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 21: 452.
1886.-"On rocky hiUs west of [Ciudad] Chihuahua, C. G. Pringle, April and August, 1885 (n. 208, 372)."-Syntypi, GH; isosyntypi, F (208)\ = F Neg. 54773; ISTY (208, 372)\-Mimosopsis prolifica (S. Watson) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 178.
1928.
Stems, lvs and fls thinly pubemlent; otherwise as in key to varieties.
On rocky hillsides in grassland, ±1340-1440 m, apparently localized on the foothills or piedmont of Sa.
Madre Occidental in centr. Chihuahua, perhaps there replacing var. grahamii.—¥1.
IV-VI(-?).
While the foliage is that of M. grahamii, the fmit of var. prolifica suggests that of Af. aculeaticarpa sens, lat., which may be implicated in its genesis.
I tentatively refer to M. grahamii the foUowing doubtful name: Mimosopsis (?) formidabilis Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 179.
1928.-"Near Huejuquilla, Jalisco, August 25, 1897, /.
N. Rose ^797."—Holotypus, a sterile branchlet, US!; clastotypus + photo, NY! —Provisionally equated by McVaugh, 1987: 224, with M. aculeaticarpa, but the 1ft-venation is that of M. grahamii.
The type localities of Mimosopsis durangensis at Huazamota ("Huasemote") near ±22°30'N, 104^30'W and M. formidabilis near Huejuquilla at ±22°35'N, 103°55'W lie approximately 60 air km apart, the first in southernmost Durango and the second in the n.-w. prong of Jalisco, in barrancas on either side of Sa. de los Huicholes.
These two names are very likely conspecific.
41.
Mimosa minutifolia B. L. Robinson & Greenman, Amer. J. ScL III, 50: 150.
1895.- "Fruiting specimen collected by C. G. Pringle, on rocky hills near Rio Blanco, JaUsco, 26 May, 1891 (No. 5142)."-Holotypus, GH! = NY Neg. 11986.—Mimosopsis minutifolia (B. L. Robinson & Greenman) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 175.
1928.
M. minutifolia sensu B. L. Robinson, 1898: 322; McVaugh, 1987: 214. jywarf subshrub 1.5-5 dm, armed at most nodes with a pair of straight infrastipular aculei 1-3.5 mm and on some intemodes with one recurved infrapetiolar one, the young growth puberulent and granular, the axes of some lvs aculeolate, the globose capitula axillary to contemporary lvs, immersed in foliage.
Stipules setiform 2-5 mm, 1-nerved distally.
Leaf-formula x-xxiv/16-22, the If-stk of longer lvs 2.5-6 cm, the petiole and longer interpinnal segments (1.5-)2-7 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 4-10(-12) mm, the interfoliolar segments mostly less than 0.5 mm, the lfts concave ventrally and imbricated; lfts ovate or broadly elliptic obtuse, the largest 0.6-1.5 x 0.4-0.65 mm, 1.5-2.5 times as long as wide, essentially nerveless extemally.
Peduncles 7-19 mm; capitula (few seen) ±7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the claviform fl-buds puberulent at ti^; flowers 5-merous 10-androus; calyx deeply campanulate ±1.4 mm, the corolla ± twice as long. Pods solitary or few per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong obtuse mucronate 20-35 X 6.5-7.5 mm, the nearly straight replum 0.7-1.1 mm wide, the livid-brown, firmly papery valves densely gray-pubemlent and remotely reddish-granular, low-colliculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike thinly or densely hispid with erect, yellowish or bronzed, glabrous or thinly plumulose setaculei to 2-3 mm, the valves separating from replum in one piece.
On dry sunny slopes in oak woodland, ± 1900- 2600 m, apparently local in the upper Santiago basin in centr. and n. Jalisco, adj. Aguascalientes, and to be expected in adj. Zacatecas.—Fl.
VIIVIII(-?).
42.
Mimosa lacerata Rose, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 5: 141, fig. 5.
1897.-"Collected by Mr. E. W. Nelson from the vicinity of Piaxtla, Puebla, altitude 1,279 meters, November 24, 1894 (No. 2008); also by Mr. Pringle .
.
. near Tehuacan and Esperanza, altitude 1,968 meters, December 23, 1895 (No. 6247); fmit also sent from Cuemavaca [Morelos], 1896 (with [Pringle] No. 6384)."-Syntypi, US! isosyntypi.
Nelson 2008 (pods only) and Pringle 6247, NYl-Acanthopteron laceratum (Rose) Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 179.
1928.
Mimosopsis glutinosa Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 178.
1928.-"Puebla.
Type from San Luis Tultitlanapa, July, 1908, [C. A.] Purpus 3174."
- Holotypus, NY! —Non Mimosa glutinosa Malme, 1931 .—Equated with M. lacerata by Grether, 1987: 313.
M. biuncifera var. horrida Miranda, Anales Inst.
Biol.
Univ. Nac. Mexico 12: [587, 590] 610.
1941.-"... cerros calizos del NO. de Matamoros, Pue[bla], 22 Ma.
1941."—Holotypus, determined by Grether, 1987: 313: Miranda 1410, MEXU, not seen.- Equated with M. lacerata by Grether, I.e. Stiffly wide-branched, potentially arborescent shrubs l~^ m, strongly armed at nodes with (1-)2 broad-based fuscous aculei 3-10(-12) mm, the young growth finely pubemlent and granular but the concolorous lfts facially glabrous or glabrate, ciUolate, the foliage dimorphic, the lvs of barren long-shoots ample and pluri-pinnate, those of floriferous spurs much smaller and simpler, the inflorescence of globose capitula on brachyblasts along flexuous annotinous branches either accompanied or not by contemporary lvs.
Stipules of primary lvs linear-attenuate or setiform 1.5- 5 mm, obscurely 1-nerved, those of brachyblasts shorter.
Leaf-formula of primary lvs iv-xiii/15- 22, the If-stk 2-9(-12) cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 1.5-3 cm, the linear or narrowly lanceoblong, acute or apiculate lfts attaining (2.5-)3- 6 X 0.7-1.8 mm, 3.2-4.3(-5) times as long as wide, aU tenuously (1-)2-nerved from pulvinule, the scarcely excentric midrib faintly pinnate, the posterior nerve very short and fine; lf-formula of brachyblast Ivs ii-v/9-15, the lf-stks ± 1-2 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 1 cm or less, the longer lfts 2-3 mm.
Peduncles mostly 2-5 together, 10- 25 mm, much thickened in fruit; capitula without filaments 5-7 mm diam., moriform, the flbuds thinly or densely puberulent at tip; flowers of M. aculeaticarpa except for shorter calyx, this 0.55-0.8 mm long, not more than V s as long as corolla.
Pods several per capitulum, commonly stipitate but occasionally subsessile, the stipe ordinarily 1-7 mm, the undulately broad-linear body in profile 30-65 mm long and without lacerate wing of replum 6-8 mm wide, 5-S-seeded, the scarcely dilated replum charged along dorsal rib with a continuous or subcontinuous, single file of laterally compressed, broad-based, lustrous brown setaculei to (2.5-)3-7(-8) mm tall usuaUy all confluent into a jagged fringe, but sometimes some or most narrowly discrete, the livid, glabrous but densely granular and resinous valves almost plane, when ripe becoming papery and separating from replum in one piece.
In desert matorral and deciduous brush-woodland, 1350-2520 m, commonly but not exclusively on calcareous substrates, colonial along the plateau slope of Sa.
Madre Oriental from Hidalgo and adj. Queretaro to n. and centr. Oaxaca, w. through Morelos into e. Guerrero.—Fl. (III-)IV-VI, the fmits long persistent among the expanded summer foliage.
Mimosa lacerata rather closely simulates M. aculeaticarpa in most respects, but differs in the shorter calyx, the exaggerated armature of the pod, and further from tropical montane Mexican forms of that polymorphic species in bimodal branching pattem, providing for vernal flowers from brachyblasts and summer foliage from longshoots.
A simUar winged fmit, in which the setaculei of the replum are greatly dilated at base and confluent into jagged margin, has developed in lowland M. bahamensis, but is there accompanied by a distinctive indumentum and leafformula.
Since its description nearly a century ago the pod of M. lacerata has been found to vary considerably in length of stipe, in width of body, and development of the marginal wings, of which the component setaculei are sometimes found partly or largely separate to the base, as in the type-collection of Mimosopsis glutinosa.
From the material seen, much of which lacks mature fmits, it appears that the typical broad, long-stipitate and continuously broad-winged pod is prevalent from the Tehuacan Desert southand southwest-ward, and the narrower, often shortly stipitate and less emphatically winged or only strongly setaculeate pod prevails northward from Puebla into Queretaro, but is also present at the margin of the Tehuacan Desert (e.g., M. glutinosa).
The intraspecific variation requires systematic study in the field of the spring and summer aspects of each population.
43.
Mimosa sp., verosimiliter M. aculeaticarpae var. biunciferae Bentham affinis.—Mexico.
Sonora: hillsides 7 mi n.-e. of Cajeme on road to Tesopaco, 2.
III.1933 (fl), Ira L. Wiggins 6384 (MICH).
Stiffly branched microphyllous shrub with fuscous lenticellate, wide-angled flexuous branches, armed at nodes with a pair of broad-based infrastipular aculei to 3-4 mm, the If-axes and brachyblasts minutely whitish-pubemlent, the small subglobose capitula arising with Ivs from brachyblasts along annotinous branches.
Stipules subulate 1-2 mm, those of primary lvs deciduous, those of brachyblasts internally villosulous.
Leaf-formula (so far as known from flowering specimen) ii-iv/6-9, the If-stk of fasciculate lvs 3-18 mm, the petiole 1.5-8 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 1.5-4 mm, the lfts narrowly oblong ±1.5-2.5 x 0.4-0.7 mm, faintly 1-nerved dorsally [primary lvs oflong-shoots could be more elaborate and larger].
Peduncles 1-2 per brachyblast 5-8 mm; capitula without filaments 4-4.5 mm diam., moriform, the obovoid-pyriform flbuds ^abrons; flowers 5-merous 10-androus, glabrous, "pinkish"; calyx 0.7-1.9 mm, a little less than half as long as coroUa, this 2-2.3 mm, its lobes 0.6-1 mm; filaments almost free, exserted 3-3.5 mm; pod unknown.
The plant described above was distributed as M. grahamii, but appears more closely related to M. aculeaticarpa var. biuncifera, of which it may even be an extreme xeromorphic form.
Normally, the capitula of M. aculeaticarpa are bome exclusively on coevally expanding long-shoots, whereas here all are produced from hemispherical brachyblasts on annotinous branchlets.
Furthermore the calyx is shorter than normal in even the smallest, most xeromorphic expressions of var. biuncifera.
Cajeme (now Ciudad Obregon) is situated on the floor of the Sonoran Desert in the lower Yaqui valley, in the Foothills of Sonora zone as defined by Shreve & Wiggins (1964, vol.
1, map 1); typical var. biuncifera is a typical element of grassland at levels well above the Sonoran Desert.
The fruit is required for taxonomic evaluation.
44.
Mimosa aspera M. E. Jones, Contr. W. Bot. 15: 133.
1929.—No locality given, the missing data supplied by Jones, Contr. W. Bot. 16: 42.
1930.-"No.
22995.
La Barrance [sic, = w. of Plan de Barranca, Jalisco, fide McVaugh, 1987: 204], Febmary 21, 1927."-Holotypus, POM, seen in photo (NY!) kindly supplied by R. Grether, 1987.
M. aspera sensu Morton, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 29: 98.
1945; McVaugh, 1987: 204.
Shrubs of unknown stature, armed on infrastipular ribs of intemodes and on some If-axes with broad-based aculei, thinly puberulent, the lfts glabrous or glabrate, the fls capitulate but the organization of inflorescence not known.
Stipules subulate 3-5 mm.
Leaf-formula iii-iv/8-10, the petiole almost 0, the longer interpinnal segments to 18-23 mm, the rachis of longer pinnae ±5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 5-7 mm; lfts oblong-eUiptic, obtuse or subacute, to 8-12 x 3- 4.5 mm, reticulate-nerved beneath.
Pods sessile in a radiating cluster, in profile linear-oblong, obtuse at each end, ±30 x 8 mm, the replum densely hispid with 2-3 series of straight erect setaculei to 3.5 mm, the stiffly papery valves both puberulent and densely setaculeate, separating from replum in one piece.
Mimosa aspera, imperfectly known only from the type-collection, which consists of one leafy branchlet and one detached cluster of dehisced pods, is provisionally assigned to ser. Acanthocarpae because of the fmit's valvate dehiscence.
In this context the relatively simple lf-formula and relatively large, distant, dorsally venulose and ventrally lustrous leaflets are distinctive.
The foregoing description is compiled from that of McVaugh (1987: 204) and the cited photograph.
45.
Mimosa barrancana Gentry, Brittonia 6: 314.
194S.—''Gentry 5288, collected on Sierra Tres Picos, Durango, Mexico [25°N, 107°W, Gentry, BuU.
Torrey Bot. Club 73: 357, map.
1946] December 20, 1939, altitude about 3500 feet "-Holotypus, MICH! = MICH Neg. 3817; isotypi, MO! NY! US! Slender erect shrubs 2-3 m with pliant smooth castaneous branches armed at most nodes with a pair of straight, horizontal or gently decurved infrastipular aculei 1-3 mm and on rare internodes with one similar, distantly displaced infrapetiolar one, glabrous except for residually ciliolate lfts and stipules, the lfts olivaceous concolorous, the inflorescence a narrow thyrse of hemispherical capitula surpassed by the mature subtending If.
Stipules erect, setiform 1-3 mm, persistent.
Leaf-stalks very slender 20-50 mm, sometimes randomly aculeolate on dorsal rib, the petiole 2-16 x 0.3-0.5 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 7-12 mm, the ventral sulcus bridged between pinna-pairs but espiculate; pinnae 3-5-jug., little graduated, the rachis of longer ones 10-20 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 4-6-jug., the first and last pair shorter and proportionately broader, the first pair 1-2 mm distant from divaricate subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.4 mm, the plane blades ovate-oblong from shallowly cordate base, acuminulate at apex, those at midrachis 4.5-10 X 2—4 mm, 1.8-2.5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath weakly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the straight midrib a little displaced, the posterior nerve expiring short of mid-blade.
Peduncles 1-2 per node, 1.5-3 cm; capitula without filaments ±6 mm diam., the caducous bracts not seen; receptacle claviform, scarcely 1.5 x 1 mm; pedicels 0.3-0.45 mm; flowers either 4- or 5-merous diplostemonous, glabrous; calyx membranous campanulate 0.5- 0.6 mm, minutely denticulate; corolla 2.1-2.4 mm, the erect ovate subacute 1 -nerved lobes ±1.1 X 0.7 mm; filaments not seen entire; ovary glabrous.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, lunately linear in profile, 35-50 x 5.5 mm, 6-8-seeded, proximally attenuate into a stipe 3-4 mm, cuspidate at apex, the shaUowly undulate, unarmed replum ±0.4 mm wide, the smooth, weakly venulose chartaceous valves elevated over each seed as a low, longitudinally elliptic coUiculus, when ripe separating in one piece from convex abaxial side of replum; 5^^J5 basipetal, compressed, ± 4 x 3 X 1 mm.
In semi-arid oak woodland near 1000-1050 m, known only from the foothills of Sa.
Madre Occidental e. of Culiacan, Sinaloa, but just within the Durango state line near 25°N.—Fl. (?-)XXI; fr.
XII. 46.
Mimosa moniliformis (Britton & Rose) R. Grether & Bameby, comb. nov. Mimosopsis (?) moniliformis Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 179.
1928.-"Alamos, Sonora, September [16-30], 1890, E. Palmer 627."-Holotypus, US 25129\ = NY Neg. 12179; clastotypus (pods only), ISTY!; isotypus, GH! Acacia sp. Rose, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 1: 99.
1891.
Bushy shrubs and small trees attaining 3 m, armed at random nodes with 1-2 straight erect, immediately infrastipular aculei, the annotinous branchlets fuscous lenticellate, the If-axes residually pubemlent, the plane concolorous lfts either facially glabrous or thinly puberulent, ciliolate, the globose or ellipsoid capitula in the axil of coeval lvs along homotinous branchlets.
Stipules subulate-setiform 1-2.5 mm, becoming dry fragile.
Leaf-formula iv-viii/7-10, the lf-stks 2- 5 cm, the ventral sulcus either continuous or bridged between pinna-pairs but espiculate, the rachis of longer pinnae to 16(-?) mm, the paraphyllidia ascending; lfts linear-oblong from shallowly semicordate base, ±3-6 x 0.8-1.5 mm, deltately subacute, weakly 1 -nerved dorsally, the midrib subcentric.
Peduncles 7-21 mm; capitula without filaments 7-12 x 6-5 mm, the receptacle clavate or linear, 1-10 mm long; bracts Unearoblanceolate ±1 mm, deciduous;y/ow^r^ 5-merous 10-androus, the campanulate, minutely broad-toothed calyx ±0.8 x 0.5 mm, minutely puberulent extemally; corolla narrowly vaseshaped ±3 mm, the narrowly ovate 1-nerved lobes ±1.1 X 0.6 mm, thinly minutely puberulent, pink; filaments pink-purple, monadelphous through ±0.25 mm, exserted 4.5-5.5 mm.
Pods 1-5 per capitulum, in profile undulately Unear, gently decurved, 50-76 x 4-5 mm (but only ±1.5 mm wide at interseminal isthmi), proximally attenuate into a stipe nearly 2 mm and distally contracted into an erect cusp ±5-7 mm, the smooth unarmed, dorsally flattened replum 0.6- 0.9 mm wide, subequally constricted along each suture, the almost plane, smooth brown glabrous valves obscurely raised over seeds in a longitudinal ridge, when ripe separating from replum either in one piece or tardily irregularly articulate into ovate-elliptic, individually dehiscent panels 6-8 mm long; seeds vertically basipetal from filiform funicle, in broad profile elliptic-obovate ±4 X 2.2 mm, the testa lustrous brown.
In thom-scrub on foothiUs below 850 m, known only from the western base of Sa.
Madre Occidental in lat. ±27°-27°25'N in s. Sonora (Alamos; S. Bemardo), Mexico.-R. (?-)VI-VII(-?).
According to Britton's note on the clastotypus at ISTY, Robinson doubted that it belonged to Mimosa, but the pod is essentially similar, except for somewhat thicker replum, to that of M. gentryi and M. barrancana, and flowers collected at Alamos by R. Grether are those of an unexceptional Mimosa.
Apart from the longer pod, consisting of individual segments dilated lengthwise and separated by deeply recessed isthmi, M. moniliformis differs substantially from M. barrancana only in slightly more numerous pairs of pinnae and leaflets.
In the material from Alamos the capitular receptacle is globose or claviform, not over 2 mm long; in the one specimen from San Bemardo (Pennell 19713, NY) it is elongate to 1 cm, and the capitulum in consequence becomes ellipsoid.
Biol.
Rosaura Grether of Universidad Metropolitana-Iztapalapa, Mexico, who independently recognized the need for a new combination based on Mimosopsis moniliformis B. & R., graciously permits me to use her name as co-author.
47.
Mimosa gentryi Bameby, sp. nov., M. barrancanae Gentry proxime affinis, ab ea imprimis petiolis communibus abbreviatis 1.5- 17 (nec 20-50) mm longis, petiolis veris 1.5- 3.5 (nec 2-16) mm longis, pinnisque 1-3 (nec 3_5)_jugis manifeste diversa; a M moniliformi (Britton & Rose) iisdem notulis et ulterius legumine parum inter semina constricto distans.—Mexico.
Chihuahua: Sa.
Chamco.
Rio Mayo, 25.vni.1936 (fl), Howard Scott Gentry 20i<9.-Holotypus (fl), F = NY Neg. 11900; isotypus, US 7656659.—Sonora: Sa.
Tecurahui, 25-28.
X.1961, Gentry (with Barclay & Arguelles) 79^25. -Paratypi (fr), LL = NY Neg. 11894b, US 2366242.
Virgate shrubs attaining 2-3 m, with long straight pliant smooth castaneous branches armed at nodes with a pair of almost straight, widely ascending infrastipular aculei 2-5 mm, except for residually ciliolate young lfts glabrous throughout, the foliage olivaceous concolorous, the inflorescence a narrow thyrse of hemispherical capitula in a succession of If-axUs on peduncle much longer than subtending If-stk, and a few capitula from brachyblasts on annotinous stems well below the current thyrse.
Stipules erect, setiform (1-)2—4.5 mm, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 1.5-17 mm, the petiole 1.5-5 mm, sometimes reduced to the slender wrinkled pulvinus, the single interpinnal segment or the longer of two 3-10 mm, the ventral sulcus continuous (spicules 0), the terminal appendage setiform; pinnae 1-3-jug., the distal pair a little longer, the rachis of longest ones 4- 26 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments (1-)1.5- 5.5 mm; lfts 3-6-jug., the first and last pairs shorter, the blades oblongor ovate-elliptic from oblique base, acuminulate, those at mid-rachis 4-9 X (1.2-)1.8-3.5 mm, 1.7-3.3 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib a little displaced, simple, the inner posterior nerve expiring at or below mid-blade, the outer one short or obsolete.
Peduncles 1-2 per node, 12-28 mm; capitula without filaments 7-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the receptacle ±1-1.5 mm; bracts shorter than calyx, early deciduous; flowers randomly 4- and 5-merous, diplostemonous; calyx membranous campanulate 0.8-1 mm, the tube glabrous, the teeth scarcely 0.1 mm, the orifice minutely ciliolate; corolla narrowly funnelform 2.5-4.3 mm, the ovate or lanceolate, distally recurving lobes ± 1-1.3 X 0.55-0.9 mm; filaments lilac, exserted 4.5-6 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, in profile undulately linear, gently decurved, the whole 30-45 x 5-6 mm, 4-6-seeded, attenuate at base into a stipe ± as long as calyx and at apex into a cusp 1.5-2.5 mm, the shallowly constricted, unarmed replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, the stiffly papery, brownish sublustrous, faintly venulose glabrous valves elevated over each seed as a longitudinal coUiculus, when ripe separating, primarily along abaxial side, from the replum in one piece, the cavity continuous; seeds basipetal, compressed-ellipsoid 4.5-5 x 2.5-2.8 mm, the testa fuscous dull.
In pine-oak forest and oak-savanna, ±900- 1300 m, known only from Sas.
Charuco and Tecurahui on the rio Fuerte-rio Mayo divide in s. w. Chihuahua and adj. Sonora, and from Sa.
Sumtato near 25°40'N in n.-e. Sinaloa, Mexic o . - R .
VII-VIII(-?); fr.
X(-?).
The type-collection of Af. gentryi was misidentified by Standley (in herb.) as M. lindheimeri A. Gray, but was not mentioned as such in Gentry's report on the plants of Rio Mayo.
A later collection (Gentry 6594, ISTY) from Sa.
Sumtato was distributed as M. pringlei.
While this last is certainly of the same group, the truly close kindred of M. gentryi are M. barrancana and M. moniliformis, vicariant southand north-ward respectively low on the Pacific slope of Sa.
Madre Occidental.
From each of these M. gentryi differs in abbreviated leaf-stalks and few pinnae.
The only shallowly constricted pod is almost that of M. barrancana.
Mimosa pringlei, a species native at the lower edge of the oak-forest on the east slope of Sa.
Madre, has similar leaf-formula but differs greatly in stiff xeromorphic life-form and hispidulous flowers.
48.
Mimosa pringlei S. Watson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 21: 452.
1886.—Typus infra sub var. pringlei indicatur.
Stiffly branched microphyllous shrubs 4-15(- ?) dm with flexuous, usually fuscous lenticellate older branches, armed at some or many nodes with 1 or 2 ascending, broad-based, gently recurved, brown or blanched infrastipular aculei (1-)2-5 mm occasionally accompanied by one infrapetiolar aculeus downwardly displaced onto intemode, the young growth, except for sometimes facially glabrous lfts, pubemlent overaU and in part sparsely red-granular, the lfts pale green concolorous, the hemispherical or subglobose capitula solitary and geminate in If-axils of homotinous branchlets, sometimes pseudoracemose in praefloration but early immersed in fohage.
Stipules subulate-setiform 0.5-2.5 mm, obscurely 1-nerved.
Leaf-formula i-ii(-iii)/(2-)3- 5, the lf-stks (or petioles) 1-18 mm, sometimes randomly few-aculeolate, the ventral sulcus continuous, espiculate; rachis of longer pinnae 2.5- 12(-17, few over 10) mm, the lfts oblongor obovate-elliptic or broadly elliptic, obtuse or apiculate, the larger ones (1.5-)2-7.5(-8) x 1- 3.5(-4) mm, 1.5-2.2 times as long as wide, aU either faintly (1-)2(-3)-nerved dorsally or nerveless, the midrib dividing blade ±1:2-3.
Peduncles very slender 5-16 mm; capitula without filaments 4-6 mm diam., moriform, the fl-buds puberulent; flowers sessile or minutely pedicellate, 5-merous 10-androus, in some capitula mostly bisexual and in some all staminate (frequency of variation unknown); calyx membranous campanulate 0.5-1.3 mm, minutely denticulate; corolla turbinate vase-shaped 2.5-3.7 mm, the lanceolate lobes 0.8-1.4 mm, in late anthesis either recurved or erect; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.2-0.5 mm into a stemonozone below the ovary, exserted 3.5-5 mm.
Pods (of var. pringlei, those of var. graminetorum not seen fully ripe) 1-3 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile Unear-oblong, a little decurved, 21-27 X 5-5.5 mm, 3-7-seeded, cuneately contracted at each end, the unarmed or randomly aculeolate replum ±0.6 mm wide, scarcely or not constricted between seeds, the smooth brownish-stramineous valves elevated over the seeds in a longitudinal ridge, when ripe separating from replum in one piece.
The foregoing description includes characters of two closely related taxa that are vicariantly dispersed along the east foothiUs of Sa.
Madre Occidental, either in grassland or in the lower oak-belt, one (M. pringlei sens, str.) in central Chihuahua, the other ranging from southern Chihuahua into Durango.
While intuitively recognized as different, owing principally to disposition of the upper leaves, their technical descriminatory characters are weak or overlap, and I therefore class them provisionally as varieties of M. pringlei.
Their status requires field study.
Key to varieties of M. pringlei I. Lvs at and toward flowering nodes as long as or longer than intemodes, the flowering branchlets consequently well clothed in foliage; lfts oflonger pinnae 3-5-jug.; fl-buds clavate-fusiform; calyx 0.5-0.9 mm; coroUa-lobes recurved at full anthesis; centr. Chihuahua 48a. var. pringlei (p. 105).
1.
Lvs at and toward flowering nodes shorter than intemodes, thefloweringbranchlets consequently remotely foliate; lfts of longer pinnae 2-4(-5)- jug.;fl-budsobovoid; calyx 0-7-1.3 mm; corollalobes erect at full anthesis; s. Chihuahua and n.- centr. Durango 48b. var. graminetorum (p. 105).
48a. Mimosa pringlei S. Watson var. pringlei.
M. pringlei S. Watson, 1886, I.e., sens, str.— "On rocky hills east of [Ciudad] Chihuahua; C. G. Pringle, October, 1885 (n. 545)."-Holotypus, GH! = NY Neg. 77957.-Note: the widely distributed Pringle 724, collected in flower at the same place in August, 1886, is conspecific but not isotypic—M/mc>5c>/>5/5 pringlei (S. Watson) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. n .
23(3): 175.
1928.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
On stony hillsides at lower edge of the oakbelt, locally abundant on the e. foothills of Sa.
Madre Occidental in centr. Chihuahua, Mexic o . - H .
VII-IX. 48b. Mimosa pringlei S. Watson var. graminetorum Bameby, var. nov., a var. pringlei foliis caulinis primariis capitula subtendentibus intemodio seqenti brevioribus (caulibus hornotinis fertilibus ideo quasi remotifoliis), alabastris obovoideis (nec clavato-fusiformibus), calyce saepe longiori (0.7-1.3, nec 0.5-0.9 mm), necnon coroUae lobulis ad anthesin erectis (nec retrocurvis) diversa.—Mexico.
Durango: mesquite-grassland, 5000-5600 ft [±1500-1750 m], near Inde, 20.
IX.1943 (fl, fr jun), H. S. Gentry 6575.-Holotypus, MICH = NY Neg. 12366.
Characters as given in diagnosis and key to varieties.
In arid grassland between 1500 and 2000 m, on the e. foothills and adj. piedmont of Sa.
Madre Occidental in s. Chihuahua (w. of Hidalgo de Parral) and n. Durango (Inde; La Zarca).—Fl.
VII-X. 49.
Mimosa zimapanensis Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 166.
1928.
M. tenuiflora Bentham, London J. Bot. 5:92.1846, nom. illeg. — "Zimapan in [Hidalgo] Mexico, Coulter.''— Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)!—Non M. tenuiflora Poiret, 1810.
M. tenuiflora sensu Standley, 1922: 363. cellate, randomly armed at nodes with 1-2 recurved, brown or stramineous, infrastipular aculei 1.5-2.5 mm, the new growth minutely puberulent and orange-granular but not glandular, the plane lfts facially glabrous, thinly or remotely ciliate, the globose capitula fasciculate by 2-4 in the axils of a succession of small, coevally expanding lvs along new branchlets, forming prior to anthesis a shortly exserted pseudoraceme.
Stipules erect, subulate ±1-2 mm, 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-formula i-ii(-ex Benth. iii)/4-7(-8), the lf-stks of lvs associated with peduncles (the lower not seen) 1-9 mm, the sulcus continuous between pinna-pairs, the rachis of distal pinnae 8-15 mm; lfts oblong-obovate obtuse, mostly 3.5-4.5 x 2-2.5 mm, faintly 1 -nerved dorsally, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2.
Peduncles ±1-2 cm; capitula without filaments ±7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid or claviform receptacle becoming 1-3 mm, the narrowly ellipsoid reddish fl-buds glabrous but at tip strongly papillate; bracts oblanceolate ±0.4 mm, deciduous;y7ow^r5 4-merous 8-androus, glabrous; calyx campanulate 0.6-0.8 mm, the rim minutely denticulate, the teeth 0.1 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped ±3.7 mm, the cymbiform lobes ±0.9 x 0.6 mm; filaments free to base (?), exserted 4.5 mm; style filiform; fruit unknown.
I have been unable to associate the type of M. zimapanensis with any modem collection.
It resembles M. pringlei var. pringlei in aspect and in fusiform flower-buds, but differs in glabrous flowers.
At first sight it suggests M. texana var. filipes, but the aculei are infrastipular, not infrapetiolar.
Zimapan, the type-locality of record, is well-known botanically, but has not yielded confirming specimens necessary for interpretation, and the locality may be a mistaken one.
In the present state of uncertainty, M. zimapanensis can be associated only provisionally with M. pringlei.
Bentham may have seen more complete material in Coulter's herbarium at Dublin, as the protologue indicates a somewhat higher leaf-formula than shown on the small Kew specimen, which consists of the tip of a flowering branch.
B(iv).
Series ACANTHOLOBAE Bameby Fruticose but of unknown stature, apparently Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Acantholobae Barrelated to M. pringlei but the diagnostic fmit neby, stat. et nom. nov. Neomimosa Britton unknown, the annotinous stems densely lenti- & Rose, N. eurycarpa (B. L. Robinson) Britton & Rose = M. acantholoba var. eurycarpa (B. L. Robinson) Bameby.
Potentially arborescent microphyllidious shrubs, resembling ser. Bimucronatae in everything but units of inflorescence globose to spiciform, in fls with rare exceptions 5-, not 4-merous, and typically but not without exception in broadly ellipsoid pod.
Leaf-formula in primary lvs vii-xv(-xxvi)/( 15-) 18-40 (lower in lvs at base of inflorescence); largest lfts ±2.5-8 mm.
Floral receptacle 1-35 mm; calyx 0.45-1.4 mm; corolla 2.2-3.2 mm, 5-merous; filaments either white or pinkish, obscurely united at base.
Pod stipitate, the body 3.5-8 x 1-2.3 cm, the replum either armed or not, the valves either smooth or setose, separating in one piece from replum.—Spp. 2, of seasonally dry or subdesertic tropical lowlands: one pluriracial and of bicentric dispersal in a) w. and s. Pacific Mexico and n. Central America, there crossing the divide to the Caribbean slope, and in b) Pacific Ecuador (with Galapagos Is.) and n.-w. Peru; the second known only from El Salvador.
The typical member of ser. Acantholobae is unique in its broad elliptic, planocompressed, stipitate pod with inarticulate valves, but appears in other respects almost equally related to ser. Bimucronatae and ser. Distachyae, for one or other of its varieties may have the capitula of the former and spikes of the latter.
At anthesis the capitate forms of M. acantholoba resemble Bimucronatae in everything but prevailingly pentamerous flowers, while the spicate forms are discordant in ser. Distachyae only because of the small narrow leaflets.
Apart from its peculiar size and outline, the pod of Af. acantholoba resembles that of ser. Distachyae in varying from smooth to densely hispid, with replum either aculeate or unarmed.
The var. acantholoba, the only representative of its species known to occur in South America, differs weakly from the high Andean ser. Andinae, in some of which the valves of the pod remain inarticulate in dehiscence, in more numerous pairs of leaflets and in the characteristic profile of the fruit.
The recently discovered M. seticuspis is introduced here because it is not separable, without the fruit, from Central American varieties of M acantholoba with shortly spicate flowers.
The linear pod weakens the definition of the series, but the close affinity of the species to M. acantholoba s.l. can hardly be challenged.
Conspectus of ser. Acantholobae 50.
M. acantholoba (Willdenow) Poiret a. var. platycarpa (Bentham) Bameby b. var. liesneri Bameby c. var. molinarum Bameby d. var. eurycarpa (B. L. Robinson) Bameby e. var. acantholoba 50a. M. seticuspis Bameby Key to species of ser. Acantholobae 1.
Pod elliptic or oblong-eUiptic in profile, 16-30 mm wide, terminating in a cusp 1-4 mm; range of the series 50.
Af. acantholoba (p. 106).
1.
Pod linear 10-11 mm wide, terminating in a cusp 5-10 mm; local in El Salvador 50a. Af. seticuspis (p. 109).
50.
Mimosa acantholoba (WiUdenow) Poiret, Encycl.
Suppl. 1: 83.
1810.—Holotypus sub var. acantholoba indicatur.
Amply microphyllidious, potentially arborescent shrubs and bushy trees (1-)2-7 m, armed on most intemodes with 1-2 infrastipular and 1 infrapetiolar, stout broad-based recurved aculei and on either dorsal or lateral ribs of some lf-stks with similar but shorter ones (occasional branchlets unarmed), the young stems and If-axes puberulent and livid-granular, neither setose nor glandular, the foliage fresh-green subconcolorous, the plane thin-textured lfts either glabrous on both faces or puberulent beneath, the globose, ellipsoid, or spicate partial inflorescences axillary to contemporary or hysteranthous Ivs, in early anthesis often forming an exserted pseudoraceme but the fruits immersed in lvs.
Stipules erect subulate 1-4 x 0.25-0.5 mm, 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaves variable in development, the hysteranthous ones (in specimens associated commonly with mature fruit) often shorter and simpler, the lf-stks 4-13(-22) cm, the petiole 6- 25(-35) X 0.5-1.1 mm, the longer interpinnal segments (4-)5-15(-18) mm, the deep ventral sulcus continuous between pinnae (spicules 0); pinnae of primary lvs 7-15(-26)-jug., of some distal lvs only (2-)4-6-jug., randomly decrescent at each end of If-stk, the rachis of longer ones (1.2-)1.5-4.2(-5.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.2(-l .4) mm but in broad-lft forms 1.5-3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (15-) 18-34(-40)- jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the small first pair 0.3-1.6 mm distant from ascending subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.5 mm.,
the blades linear or linear-elliptic from obtusangulate base, obtuse or deltately apiculate at apex, those near mid-rachis (2-)2.6-7(-8) x (0.6-)0.7-1.8(-2) mm, (3-)3.3-5.4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 2-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib only a little forwardly displaced, the faint posterior nerve expiring or weakly brochidodrome short of mid-blade.
Peduncles either solitary or 2-4(-5) per node, 5-24 mm; capitula or spikes 4-6.5 mm diam. without filaments, the floral axis 1-35 mm, the obtuse fl-buds usually glabrous, rarely with a few minute hairs at tip; bracts 0.5-1 x 0.15-0.25 mm, caducous;y/ow^r^ sessile or almost so, (4-)5-merous diplostemonous, mostly bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.45-0.9 (in var. eurycarpa to 1.4) mm, glabrous or exceptionally thinly puberulent below the broadly shallowly lobulate rim; corolla whitish, vase-shaped or the lowest ones turbinate, 2.2-3.2 mm, the membranous ovate subacute 1-nerved lobes 0.7-1.3 x 0.6-0.8 mm, at full anthesis usuaUy arched outward; filaments usually white, in S. America sometimes pale pinkish, obscurely monadelphous through not more than 0.3 mm, exserted (3.5-)4-5.5(-6) mm; ovary short-stipitate pubemlent.
Pods commonly 1, sometimes 2-3 per capitulum or spike, the broadly elliptic indehiscent body 3.5-8 x 1.6- 2.3 cm, mostly 4-8-seeded, cuneately contracted at base into a stipe 6-14 mm and more abruptly so at apex into an erect cusp 1-4 mm, the sutures 0.45-0.65 mm diam., the seminiferous one either narrowly winged or with a commonly continuous, sometimes interrupted file of laterally compressed, broad-based, nearly erect aculei to ±1-2.5 mm, the permanently unsegmented valves at first green livid-granular piano-compressed, when ripe becoming stiffly papery or crustaceous and over the seeds discolored and often densely hispid-setose, the cavity continuous; seeds on long capillary funicle, crowded near middle of valves transverse to the pod's long axis, lenticular 4.6-5.2 x 3-3.7 mm, the testa castaneous lustrous.
A polymorphic and pluriracial species of seasonally dry scrub-woodlands on the Pacific lowlands of tropical N. and n. S. America, extending discontinuously from Sinaloa, Mexico to n.-w. Pem, in centr. America e. to the Caribbean slope in Guatemala and Honduras; only var. acantholoba in S. America.
Key to varieties of M. acantholoba 1.
Fls loosely spicate, the floral axis (13-) 15-35 mm.
2.
Pods armed along the sutures but the valves smooth; Guatemala (Zacapa and El Progreso) 50a. var. platycarpa (p. 108).
2.
Pods densely setose on valves but the sutures smooth; Costa Rica (Guanacaste) and perhaps n.-w. Nicaragua 50b. var. liesneri (p. 108).
1.
Fls capitate or only shortly and densely spicate, the floral axis 1-7 mm.
3.
Rs shortly spicate; pods smooth both on replum and valves; Honduras (El Paraiso, Valle and Choluteca).
50c. var. molinarum (p. 108).
3.
Fls capitate, the capitula globose or rarely ellipsoid; aUopatric.
4.
Pods densely hispid over seeds but the replum only erratically armed, the valves where distended over seeds becoming crustaceous when ripe and ±0.3-0.4 mm thick in section; Pacific Mexico, Colima to Oaxaca 50d. var. eurycarpa (p. 109).
4.
Pods armed on replum but the valves smooth, and where distended over seeds only 0.1-0.2 mm thick in section; bicentric: Pacific Mexico in Sinaloa; s.-w. Ecuador (with Is. Galapagos) and n.-w. Peru 50e. var. acantholoba (p. 109).
MAP 7.
Mexico, Central America, and equatorial w. South America.
Range of Af. acantholoba (Willdenow) Poiret.
50a. Mimosa acantholoba (Willdenow) Poiret var. platycarpa (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. platycarpa Bentham.
Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 417.
1875.-"Guatemala, 5A:/«- «^r."
—Holotypus, K! = NY Neg. s.n.—Neomimosa platycarpa (Bentham) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 173.
1928.
Senegalia (?) cockerellae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23: 111.
1928.—"Gualan [depto. Zacapa], Guatemala, 1912, Wilmatte P. Cockerell 61."—Holotypus (an unarmed branch in fl), NYl—Acacia cockerellae (Britton & Rose) Lundell, Contr. Univ. Mich. Herb. 4: 7.
1940.—Not accounted for by Standley & Steyermark, 1946.
In thom-forest, sometimes on serpentine, 200- 800 m, local on the headwaters of rio Motagua in s. Guatemala.
Map 7.
50b. Mimosa acantholoba (Willdenow) Poiret var. liesneri Bameby, var. nov., floribus spicatis cum var. platycarpa congruens sed leguminis valvulis dense setoso-hispidis reploque inermi diversa.—Costa Rica.
Guanacaste: Sta. Rosa National Park, 2 km n. of headquarters, grassland, ±150 m, 1.
II. 1978 (fr), R. Liesner ^500.-Holotypus, NY.
Known with certainty only from the type-collection, which resembles var. platycarpa in spicate inflorescence hut differs in the densely hispid (not smooth) valves and smooth (not aculeate) replum of the pod, but specimens from near Lago de Managua in Nicaragua, in flower only, may turn out to be the same.
Map 7.
50c. Mimosa acantholoba (Willdenow) Poiret var. molinarum Bameby, var. nov., a caeteris speciei varietatibus floribus dense breviter spicatis (axi minus quam 1 cm longa) et legumine omnino laevi inermi diversa. —Honduras.
Choluteca: between km 5 and km 20 on road to Orocuina, 60-150 m, 7.
XI. 1968 (fr), A. Molina R. 25275.-Holotypus, N Y . - V a l l e : 2 km e. of S. Lorenzo, Golfo de Fonseca, 3.
X.1968 (fl), A. Molina R. & A. R. Molina 22732.- Paratypus, NY.
In beach thickets, along river-bottoms, and in disturbed brush-woodland or pastures, 0-500 m, known only from Honduras (El Paraiso, Valle and Choluteca).
Map 7.
50d. Mimosa acantholoba (Willdenow) Poiret var. eurycarpa (B. L. Robinson) Bameby, stat. nov. M. eurycarpa B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 322.
1898.-"Collected by E. W. Nelson between Guichocovi and Lagunas, Oaxaca, at 175 to 275 m. altitude, 27 June, 1895, no. 2741; also between La Venta and Niltepec, at 60 m. altitude, 14 July, 1895, no. 2798."-Syntypi, GH!; isosyntypi, US! photo of 2741 at US + fragm, NYl—Neomimosa eurycarpa (B. L. Robinson) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 173.
1928.
M. colimensis B. L. Robinson, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist. 31: 258.
1904.-"Mexico: Colima " - Holotypus, Palmer 128 in 1897, GH!; isotypus, MICW.—Neomimosa colimensis (B. L. Robinson) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 172.
1928.- Equated with Af. acantholobaby Grether, 1987: 309.
In thorn forest, palm savanna and disturbed bmsh-woodland, 0-700(-900) m, locally plentiful along the Pacific coast and foothills from Colima s.-e. to Oaxaca.
Map 7.
50e. Mimosa acantholoba (Willdenow) Poiret var. acantholoba.
M. acantholoba Poiret, 1810, I.e., sens. str. Acacia acantholoba Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1089.
1S06.—"'Habitat in America meridionali.'\ but according to Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, Nov. gen. sp. 6: 279.
1824: ".
.
. prope Guayaquil Quitensium [Ecuador]."—Holotypus, B-WILLD 19192, seen in Microform! isotypus, Bonpland 3800, P (hb. Bonpland.)! Acacia courrantiana DeCandoUe, Prodr. 2:465.1825.— "Patria .
.
. ign[ota]... in hort.
Canariensi a cl.
Ant.
Courrant observata et mecum .
.
. commun[icata]."—Typus not seen; equated with M. acantholoba by Bentham, 1875: 426.
M. eurycarpoides B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 36:472.
1901, ex parte, exclus. char, fruct.; vide Robinson, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist. 31: 258.
1904.—"in the foothiUs of the Sierra Madre, near Colomas [Calomos], State of Sinaloa, Mexico, 21 July, 1897."—Holotypus, US!; clastotypus (fragm), NYl—Neomimosa eurycarpoides (B. L. Robinson) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 172.
1928.- Equated with Af. acantholobaby Grether, 1987: 309.
Neomimosa russellii Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.23(3): 173.
1928.-"Rosario, Sinaloa, August 4,1910, Rose, Standley & Russell 7^555."-Holotypus, US! = NY Neg. s.n. —Equated with M. acantholoba by Grether 1987: 309.
M. acantholoba sensu Bentham, Bot. voy.
Sulphur 90.
1844; 1875: 426; Macbride, 1943: 86; Rudd in Wiggins & Porter, ¥1.
Galapagos Is. 651.
1971.
Characters of the species, as modified by key to varieties.
In thom-scrub, on brushy stream-banks and in temporarily wet or flooded savanna thickets, surviving in pasture hedgerows and along roadside fences, below 300 m, locally plentiful in arid lowlands of Pacific Ecuador s. from s. depto. Esmeraldas and in adj. n.-w. Peru (Tumbes, Piura and Lambayeque), lat. 0°30'N-6°S; Galapagos Is. (S. Cristobal); and disjunct on the coastal plain and lower foothills of Sa.
Madre in Sinaloa, Mexico (valley of rio de Buluarte, near 23°N).—R. in S. America primarily X-III, sporadically through the year.
Map 7.
50a. Mimosa seticuspis Bameby, sp. nov., habitu toto, foliorum formula, floribus 5-meris, necnon legumine valvatim dehiscenti M. acantholobae varietates capitula spiciformia gerentes simulans, legumine autem lato-lineari 6-7 X 1-1.1 m m metienti longissime setosocuspidato distincta—El Salvador.
Santa Anna: ±15 km W of Metapan on low-lying ground N of Lago de Guija, 22.11.1989 (fl, fr), C. E. Hughes 7256.-Holotypus, N Y (ex FHO).
Untidily branching microphyllidious shrubs ± 3 m tall with stiff straight, pale brown stems, armed near and below middle of intemodes with solitary stout, basally swollen, recurved infrastipular aculei 4-7 mm, the young branchlets and all Ifand inflorescence-axes pubemlent with fine white hairs mixed with random red granular trichomes, the olivaceous Ifts almost concolorous, thinly minutely puberulent dorsally, ciliolate, the short dense spikes of white fls axillary to coeval lvs and distally to hysteranthous ones, hence pseudoracemose.
Stipules stiffly erect, setiform ± 1 - 2 mm, subpersistent.
Leaf-formula (v-xi/ (14-) 17-26; lf-stks 5-8.5 cm, the petiole and longer interpinnal segments subequilong 5-10 mm, the ventral groove continuous between pinnapairs; pinnae a little decrescent toward each end of If-stk, the longer ones 2-4 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-1.4 mm; a pair of minute paraphylUdia next to pinna-pulvinus; lfts decrescent at each end of rachis, sessile, narrowly oblong from shallowly obtusely auriculate base, deltately subacute, the longer ones 5-6.5 x 1.1- 1.9 mm, 2.6^.5 times as long as wide, the straight midrib scarcely excentric, simple, weakly prominulous beneath, immersed above.
Peduncles solitary and geminate 15-22 mm; spikes to 30- fld.,
in early anthesis ellipsoid and without filaments 6 mm diam., the fls contiguous or almost so, the receptacular axis to 13-16 mm; bracts membranous oblanceolate ±0.5 mm, caducous; flowers 5-merous 10-androus; calyx membranous 1.4 mm, faintly 5-angulate and turbinatecampanulate, puberulent near orifice, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.25 mm; corolla 3 mm, cleft to middle into ascending, ovate acute lobes, thinly puberulent extemally; androecium 7-7.5 mm, the filaments united at base through ±0.2 mm; ovary ellipsoid, at anthesis glabrous, contracted at base into a stipe 0.3 mm, the filiform style nearly as long as the filaments.
Pod linear in profile, straight, cuneately contracted at base into a stipe 5-7 mm and more abmptly at apex into an erect, stiffly setiform cusp 5-10 mm, the body strongly compressed but coUiculate over each seed, when well fertilized 6-7 x 1-1.1 cm, 8-9-seeded, the replum nearly straight, either unarmed or toward base on ventral side armed with 1-3 erect prickles, tardily separating from the stiffly papery, tan-brown valves, these continuous and apparently indehiscent, speckled overall with minute red papilli; seeds lentiform ±4.5 mm diam., the U-shaped pleurogram ±1.3 mm diam. Along roadsides at 450 m, known only from the type-locality at 14°19'N, 89°28'W in depto. Santa Anna, El Salvador.-R. (?-)XII-II. B(v).
Series BOREALES Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Boreales Bameby, ser. nov. Fmtices xeromorphi microphylli aculeis primariis infrapetiolaribus nunc juxta nunc infra nodos (interdum 1-2 infrastipularibus sparsis auctis) armati, ramulis saepissime dimorphis, homotinis elongatis ad quemque nodum folio solitario obsitis, his anno secundo brachyblastum e foliis minoribus ac pedunculis constantem suffulcrantibus (apud M. monancistram, autem, ramulis hornotinis floriferis).
Rores nunc 5-, nunc 4-meri, et fmctus aut craspedium aut valvatim dehiscens.
FoUomm formula i-iv/l-9(-l 2), apud M. unipinnatam folia paripinnata sub-4-foliolata.— Sp. typica: M. borealis A. Gray.
Mimosa XXV. Boreales Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 145, in clave.
1928.
M. XXIV. Monancistrae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 145, in clave.
1928.
Microphyllous xeromorphic shrubs 5-12(-20) dm, armed on infrapetiolar rib of intemodes, either next to the node or downwardly displaced onto intemode, with a stout, in age often pallid aculeus, accompanied or not by 1-2 displaced infrastipular ones; stems typically bimodally branched, the annotinous long-shoots simple and bearing at each node a single If but no fls, these lvs deciduous, replaced the second year by a scaly brachyblast bearing a fascicle of smaller lvs and peduncles (but in M. monancistra always and sometimes in M. calcicola the annotinous branches floriferous).
Indumentum of fine silky hairs, or minute hairs, or almost 0, then reduced to minute crisped trichomes on adaxial face of brachyblast-stipules, at tip of If-axes, and on margin of calyx or corolla-lobes.
Stipules linear or subulate, 1-nerved or extemally nerveless.
Leaf-formula commonly i-iv(-v)/l-9(-12), the longest lfts 2-7(-9) mm, but aU lvs of M. unipinnata paripinnate, with 1 axis and ± 2 pairs of lfts.
Capitula globose, plumply ellipsoid, or hemispherical, the flowers either sessile or pedicellate, 5- or seldom 4-merous, diplostemonous, the campanulate calyx 0.4-1.6 mm, the corolla usually cleft ± half-way or, in M. borealis, nearly to base, the pink or white filaments shortly or obscurely monadelphous below the ovary.
Pods either stipitate or subsessile, undulately linear in profile, decurved or almost straight, 4-10 mm wide, 3-8(-9)-seeded, the cordlike replum either smooth or aculeate, the valves either buUately distended over each seed and articulate when mature, or low-colliculate over each seed and falling in one piece.
Spp. 10, of interior upland and n.-e. Mexico and of Atlantic drainage in s.-w. United States.
The nucleus of ser. Boreales is set off from other xeromorphic, capitate-flowered North nancistra always and M. calcicola facultatively American series by bimodal branching-pattem flower from extended long-shoots, but are linked and by predominance of infrapetiolar over into species with flowering brachyblasts by M. defrastipular aculei.
The South American ser. Farpauperata, which has the same strictly and iminosae has similar bimodal branching, but aculei mediately infrapetiolar prickles.
Mimosa moprimarily infrastipular, and uniformly tetramnancistra, which has more or less ellipsoid rather erous flowers such as occur among Boreales only than globose or hemispherical capitula, apin the much modified and specialized M. depauproaches the paucifoliolate Distachyae, from perata and M. unipinnata.
It seems likely that which the whole ser. Boreales may very weU be the superficial similarity between some Boreales descended.
Of the second, glabrate group of five and ser. Farinosae is due to convergence, each species, two have developed, perhaps indepenseries being independently derived from pentamdently, valvately dehiscent fmits, and technically erous forebears and adapted in parallel ways to differ from ser. Acanthocarpae only in infrapetidesert or temperate-xeric environments. olar, not paired infrastipular aculei.
The almost The series is built up by accretion of subgroups free petals of Af. borealis and its resistance to which lack any one unifying critical denominator sub-zero winter temperatures are obviously decommon to all, but which differ, each from one rived features, as are the conjugate leaflets of Af. or more of its neighbors, in only one character zygophylla and the simply pinnate leaves of Af. of importance.
The five species first in order are unipinnata. silky-pubescent throughout.
Of this set Af. moConspectus of ser. Boreales Mimosa * Lvs bipinnate, sericeous overall; the infrapetiolar aculei situated immediately next to the node; inflorescence variable, the capitula in the first all axillary and mostly ellipsoid, in the second globose, axillary or partly on brachyblasts, in the third always on brachyblasts; dehiscence of pod craspedial.
51. monancistra Bentham 52. calcicola Britton & Rose 53. depauperata Bentham ** Like *, but the infrapetiolar aculei displaced downward onto the intemode; capitula either globose or eUipsoid, but always on brachyblasts.
54. emoryana Bentham a. var. emoryana b. var. chihuahuana (Britton & Rose) Bameby 55. purpusii T. S. Brandegee *** Lvs bipinnate, the lfts glabrous facially; infrapetiolar aculei situated immediately next the node; capitula all from brachyblasts; dehiscence of pod valvate.
56. texana (A. Gray) SmaU a. var. texana b. var. filipes (Britton & Rose) Bameby **** Lvs bipinnate, the lfts glabrous facially; infrapetiolar aculei displaced downward onto the intemode; capitula globose, all from brachyblasts; fls pedicellate; fruit a glabrous craspedium.
57. borealis A. Gray 58. turneri Bameby ***** Everything of the preceding except lvs paripinnate (lf-formula o/l-2).
59. unipinnata Parfitt & Pinkava ****** Lvs bipinnate, but pinnae only 1- and lfts l(-2)-jug.; infrapetiolar aculei displaced below node; lfts glabrous; fls sessile in globose or hemispherical capitula from brachyblasts; fruit glabrous, valvately dehiscent.
60. zygophylla Bentham Key to species of ser. Boreales 1.
Infrapetiolar cauline aculei arising immediately below the node, either solitary or associated with 1-2 infrastipular aculei, these displaced onto the intemode.
2.
Lfts sericeous on both faces; fruit a craspedium; capitula aU or potentially some of them axiUary on new branchlets.
3.
Lf-formula ii-iv(-v)/3-9(-l 2); capitula mostly oblong-eUipsoid; valves of pod hispid; widespread in centr. Mexico 51.
Af. monancistra (p. 112).
3.
Lf-formula i-ii/2-4; capitula globose; valves of pod densely puberulent but not hispid; local in Tehuacan Desert and vicinity 52.
Af. calcicola (p. 113).
2.
Lfts glabrous facially; fmit valvately dehiscent; all capitula from brachyblasts; w. Texas and Mexican Plateau s. to Michoacan and Puebla 56.
Af. texana (p. 115).
1.
Infrapetiolar cauline aculei either solitary or associated with 1-2 infrastipular ones, but all variably displaced onto the intemode.
4.
Lfts sericeous or puberulent faciaUy; valves of pod puberulent or velutinous and sometimes also hispid.
5.
Lf-formula (i-)ii-v/3-10; corolla 5-merous; fls sessile.
6.
Calyx 0.8-1.4 mm; valves of pod both pubemlent and setose; Chihuahuan Desert, w. Texas, Coahufla, e. Chihuahua, and n.-e. Durango 54.
Af. emoryana (p. 114).
6.
Calyx 0.5-0.65 mm; valves of pod velutinous esetose; Tehuacan Desert, Puebla and adj. Oaxaca 55.
Af. purpusii (p. 115).
5.
Lf-formula i/2-3; corolla 4-merous; fls shortly pedicellate; upper rio Moctezuma basin in Queretaro and Hidalgo 53.
M depauperata (p. 113).
4.
Lfts and valves of pod glabrous facially.
7.
Petioles rounded dorsally, 1 -sulcate ventrally;flssessile; calyx 0.9-1.5 mm; lf-formula of almost all lvs i/1 (the lfts exceptionally 2-jug.); valves of pod low-coUiculate over each seed, separating from replum in one piece; Chihuahuan Desert from centr. Coahuila to n.-e. Durango and centr. S. Luis Potosi 60.
Af. zygophylla (p. 118).
7.
Petioles dorsiventrafly compressed, 2-grooved on one or both faces; fls shortly pedicellate; calyx 0.4-0.9 mm; lf-formula higher, either pinnae, or lfts, or both, 2 and more pairs; valves of pod buUately distended over each seed, articulate when ripe.
8.
Lvs conventionally bipinnate, the lf-formula i-iii(-iv)/2-7(-8); fls 5-merous.
9.
Lf-formula i-iii(-iv)/3-7(-8); petals united only at base, free beyond mouth of calyx; s.-w. United States (centr. and w. Texas to s.-e. Colorado, e. New Mexico, and s.-w. Kansas) 57.
Af. borealis (p. 117).
9.
Lf-formula i-ii(-iii)/2-3; petals united into a tube surpassing the calyx; Coahuila and trans-Pecos Texas 58.
Af. turneri (p. 117).
8.
Lvs paripinnate, the If-stk simple, bearing 2(-3) pairs of lfts; corolla 4-merous; centr. Coahufla 59.
Af. unipinnata (p. 118).
51.
Mimosa monancistra Bentham, PI. hartw. along homotinous long-shoots, prior to anthesis 12.
1839.—No locality given, this supplied by sometimes pseudoracemose but the fruits imBentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 425. mersed in foliage.
Stipules linear-subulate 0.6- 1875: "Mexico.
Aguas CaUentes."
—Holoty- 2.5 mm, weakly 1-nerved, early incurved and pus, Hartweg 70, K! = KNeg.
15529 = MICH yellowing, finally deciduous.
Leaf-formula ii-iv Neg. 612. (-v)/(3-)4-9(-10), the lf-stks 9-37 mm, 3-ribbed and sometimes aculeolate dorsally, the ventral M. similis Britton & Rose, N Amer. R^23(3): 166. ^^j^^g bridged between pinna-pairs but spicule 1928.— Mmasde San Rafael, San Luis Potosi, May, " , . n.- , .
.
.
K,/^»A^^ lo.
1911, [C A.\ Purpus 5779."-Holotypus, NY! 0; rachis of distal pmnae 6-12(-20) mm; lfts narrowly ovate or oblong-eUiptic, obtuse or subapicStiffly branched xeromorphic shrubs attaining ulate, the larger ones (2-)2.5-4.5(-5) x (0.8-)l- 8-28 dm, armed at most or sometimes at only 1.5(-1.7) mm, ±2.2-3.3 times as long as wide, scattered or random nodes with a solitary, gently aU weakly (1-)2-nerved dorsally, but only the recurved infrapetiolar aculeus 2-5 dm, the young moderately displaced midrib finely prominulous branchlets and the foUage except for often gladorsally.
Peduncles 4-16 mm; capitula without brous upper face of lfts softly minutely pubemfilaments 6-11 x (4_)4.5_6 mm, (1.2-) 1.3-2 lent or silky-pubemlent, the oblong capitula soltimes as long as diam., the receptacle 3-8 mm, itary or 2-3 together in a succession of If-axils the pyriform obtuse fl-buds pubemlent, exceeding the hracts\ flowers 5-merous 10-androus, all bisexual; calyx membranous, campanulate or turbinate, (0.9-)l-1.4 mm, extemally pubemlent, the deltate-triangular teeth 0.1-0.4 mm; coroUa vase-shaped 2-2.8(-3) mm, ± twice as long as calyx; filaments pink, united at extreme base, exserted 4-6 mm.
Pods 1-5 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile linear, lunately recurved, 20- 35 X 4.5-5.5 mm, (3-)4-5-seeded, the replum either shallowly or scarcely constricted, the replum and valves alike both puberulent and hispid overall with short plain hairs and erect, smooth or scaberulous setae, the setae of replum to 2-3 mm, those of valves more slender and shorter, the ripe valves buUately distended over each seed, breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 4-5 mm long. On dry stony hills and in foothill washes, in a variety of brush-woodland and savanna-like associations, locally abundant and forming thickets, scattered around the s. margin of the Mexican Plateau below 2200 m, from the middle Lerma valley in Jalisco e. through the Bajio to Queretaro, thence n. to the Nazas valley in e. Durango, and through San Luis Potosi to the Gulf lowlands at 140 m near 24°N in Tamaulipas; s. of the Transverse Volanic Range in Morelos.—Fl. (iy-)y-X. — Garpatillo; garruha.
The type of Af. similis appears to differ from typical Af. monancistra only in scaberulous rather than smooth setae on the pod.
McVaugh (1987: 215) described Af. monancistra as so abundant in parts of northem Jalisco as to color, when in flower, whole pastures and hillsides.
52.
Mimosa calcicola B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 325.
1898.-"Collected by C. G. Pringle, on calcareous plains of Tehuacan, State of Puebla [Mexico], at 1525 m. altitude, 29 July, 1897, no. 6765."-Holotypus, GH!; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54762, NY! (?) Acacia canescens Martens & Galeotti, Bull. Acad. Roy.
Sci. Bruxelles 10(9): 314 (=Enum. pi. Galeott.
10: 13).
1843, nom. illeg.- "(CoU.
H. Gal[eotti] No. 3214) ... avec I'espece precedente [sur les montagnes cactiferes de Tehuacan de las Grenadas, a 6,500 pieds]."—Holotypus, not seen.—Equated by Bentham, 1875: 425, with Af. depauperata, but the described leaf-formula ofi/2 and the locality strongly suggest Af. calcicola.—^on A. canescens Willdenov, 1806.
Stiffly branched microphyllous shrubs attaining 1(-?) m, armed at each node with one stout recurved, immediately infrapetiolar aculeus 2-4 mm, the defoliate old stems fuscous, the young stems, foliage and fls silky-puberulent throughout, the small globose capitula solitary and paired either in the axil of coeval lvs or directly from brachyblasts on old wood.
Stipules subulate or setiform 0.6-2.5 mm, 1-nerved, deciduous.
Leafformula i-ii/2-4, the lf-stks 2-12(-15) mm, the petiole 2-7(-9) mm, the rachis espiculate; rachis of pinnae (1.5-)2-9(-10.5) mm; lfts oblong-eUiptic or obliquely ovate, obtuse apiculate or rarely subtruncate, the larger ones 2-4.5 x 1.5-3 mm, (1.3-) 1.4-2 times as long as wide, extemally nerveless or faintly l-2(-3)-nerved dorsally.
Peduncles 5-11 mm; capitula without filaments 5- 6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the flbuds silky-pubemlent; y7ow^r5 sessile, 5-merous 10-androus, all bisexual; calyx membranous puberulent, narrowly campanulate 1.3-1.6 mm, weakly 5-ribbed, the teeth 0.2-0.3 mm; corolla 2.6-3.3 mm, the pubemlent lobes 1-nerved, a little shorter than tube; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.2-0.3 mm, exserted 3.5-4.5 mm.
Pods ±4-10 per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately linear, ± decurved, ±30-40 x 4-5 mm, 5-8-seeded, either densely or when young subvelutinously puberulent overall, the replum either unarmed or randomly rarely aculeolate, the ripe valves papery, light brown, buUately distended over each of the basipetally descending seeds, breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 4-5 mm long. In thomscrub with arborescent Cactaceae, on calcareous substrates, ±1500-1600 m, known only from the Tehuacan Desert in Puebla, immediately adj. Veracruz (Acultzingo), and perhaps adj. Oaxaca, Mexico.—Fl.
V-IX, when early in the season sometimes on leafless branches.
53.
Mimosa depauperata Bentham, PL hartweg.
13.
1839. —"prope Actopan [Hidalgo, Mexico]."—Holotypus, G. J. Graham 187, May 1830, K!; isotypus (fragm.), GH! Af. depauperatasensuStandley, 1922: 365,exclus. syn.; Britton & Rose, 1928: 166, exclus. syn. Stiffly stoutly branched microphyllous shrubs attaining 5-12 dm but often broader than taU, armed at all or most nodes with one stout, ascending or horizontal, gently recurved aculeus 1.5-4.5 mm, the old defoliate branches fuscous, the homotinous long-shoots barren, the peduncles fasciculate with coeval lvs on scaly brachyblasts, the young stems, folige and especially the pod finely silky-pubemlent.
Stipules subulate or setiform, those of brachyblasts densely imbricate persistent.
Leaf-formula i/2-3, the petiole 3-14 mm, bisulcate dorsaUy, openly 1-sulcate ventraUy, espiculate, the rachis of pinnae 1.5-3.5 (-5) mm, the lfts eUiptic or oblong-eUiptic, the distal pair 1.8-4.2 mm, aU nerveless or faintly 2-nerved dorsally.
Peduncles 2-7 mm; capitula without filaments ±5 mm diam., the fl-buds pubemlent above middle; pedicels 0.2-0.5 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx 0.6-0.7 mm, minutely denticulate, the rim tomentulose or fimbriolate; corolla 2.4-2.9 mm, the erect lobes shorter than tube; filaments pink, monadelphous at very base through ±0.2 mm, exserted 4 mm.
Pods ±1-5 per capitulum, contracted at base into a stipe or neck 2-4.5 mm, the undulately linear, downwardly curved body ±20-40 x 5 mm, 4- 7(-8)-seeded, pubemlent overall, the constricted cordlike replum armed along the convex suture with broad-based, sometimes basally confluent, erect aculei 1.5-4 mm, the papery valves bullately distended over each seed, breaking up into free-falling articles 4.5-6 mm long. In matorral, near 2000 m, local around the s.- e. edge of the Mexican Plateau, on the upper forks of rio Moctezuma, in Hidalgo and Queretaro, Mexico.-n. (III-)VI-VII. 54.
Mimosa emoryana Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 426.
1875.—Typus infra sub var. emoryana indicatur.
Stiffly branched microphyllous shrubs attaining 12 dm, armed below almost every node with one infrapetiolar and sometimes in addition 1- 2 infrastipular, broad-based recurved, at first brown-tipped but later blanched aculei (2-)3-9 mm, the infrapetiolar one often so far displaced as to appear opposed to the antecedent If, the young branches, lvs and fls silky-pubemlent or subvelutinous throughout, the globose or eUipsoid capitula arising either directly from the axil of coeval lvs on long-shoots or from smaU brachyblasts on older wood.
Stipules subulate or linear-attenuate 1-3.5 mm, weakly 1-nerved or extemally nerveless.
Leaf-formula i-iv(-v)/3-6 (-7), the lf-stks 2-40 mm, the ventral sulcus obscure or continuous (spicules 0); rachis of longer pinnae 2-12 mm; lfts oblong or eUiptic-oblong, obtuse or subacute, the longer ones (2.5-)3-5.5 X 1-2 mm, 2.1-2.8 times as long as wide, aU extemally veinless or faintly 2-nerved dorsally, the midrib subcentric.
Peduncles 6-24 mm; capitula vAthout filaments 6-10 X 5.5-7 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the pyriform fl-buds silkypubemlent, the receptacle 1-8 mm long; flowers 5-merous 10-androus, all bisexual, pubemlent overall; calyx membranous, campanulate or turbinate-campanulate (0.6-)0.8-1.4 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.1-0.3 mm; coroUa vaseshaped 3-3.9 mm, the triangular-acuminate, slightly flaring lobes 1-1.4 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.1-0.3 mm, exserted 4.5-5.5 mm; ovary pubemlent-tomentiflose.
Pods 1-7 per capitulum, sessile or almost so, in profile linear 20-50 x 5-6.5 mm, arched downward or somewhat twisted, 3-6(-7)-seeded, the scarcely constricted replum and papery valves alike densely pubemlent overall with short erect hairs and the valves always, the replum commonly, hispid with erect glabrous or scaberulous setae to 1-2.5 mm, the valves buUately distended over each seed, breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 5-9 mm long. Mimosa emoryana consists of two intergradient but, it seems, geographically separated varieties.
The var. chihuahuana resembles Af. monancistra in eUipsoid capitula, but typical Af. emoryana in downwardly displaced infrapetiolar aculei.
Only the extended primary leaf-axis and axis of receptacle distinguish var. chihuahuana from var. emoryana, and the variation is almost continuous.
Key to varieties of M. emoryana 1.
Lf-formula i-n(-iii)/3-6(-7); lf-stks mostly 2-10 mm, of some primary lvs to 16 mm; capitula globose or almost so, the receptacle 1-3 mm; Trans-Pecos Texas s. to margins of Mapimi Depression in s.-e. Chihuahua, n.-e. Durango, and s. Coahuila 54a. var. emoryana (p. 114).
1.
Lf-formula ii-iv(-v)/4-6; lf-stks of larger lvs 15- 40 mm; capitula eUipsoid, the receptacle 4-8 mm; s.-e. Chihuahua and s. Coahuila 54b. var. chihuahuana (p. 115).
54a. Mimosa emoryana Bentham var. emoryana.
Af. emoryana Bentham, 1875, I.e., sens, str. —"Mexican-Texan region, Emory's Ex- 1991] B A R N E B Y : SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 115 pedition, n. 302."
, but according to labels from "gravelly hiUs near the Cibolo of the Rio Grande."
-Holotypus, Bigelow in Mexican Boundary Survey 312 [not 302], 28 July, 1852, K!; isotypus, NY! As described in key to varieties.
On dry stony hills and along washes, in desert thom-scrub, on limestone and volcanic substrates, ±700-1350 m, locally plentiful along and near the Rio Grande in trans-Pecos Texas (Isely, 1973, map 30) and s. through the Chihuahuan Desert to the sink of rio Nazas in n.-e. Durango.—Fl. (IV-)V-VII, occasionally in late summer following rains.
54b. Mimosa emoryana Bentham var. chihuahuana (Britton & Rose) Bameby, stat. nov. Af. chihuahuana Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 165.
1928.-"SantaEulalia Mountains, Chihuahua, May 11, 1899, Rose & Hough ^27^."-Holotypus, US!; isotypus, NY! As described in key to varieties.
In the foothills of desert mountains, mostly on limestone, middle Conchos valley in e.-centr. Chihuahua and s. into s. Coahuila.—Fl.
IV-? 55.
Mimosa purpusii T. S. Brandegee, Univ. Calif. Publ. Bot. 3: 379.
1909.-"Collected on Cerro de Matzize [Puebla, May, 1908], where it grows prostrate over rocks. [C. A. Purpus] No. 3183."-Holotypus, UC; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54774, NY! \JSl—Mimosopsis purpusii (Brandegee) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 176.
1928.
Af. purpusii var. calliandroides T. S. Brandegee, Univ. Calif Publ. Bot. 3: 379.
1909.-"Collected at Las Naranjas, Oaxaca. [C. A. Purpus] No. 3184."—Isotypus, NY!—Equated with the species by Britton &Rose, 1928: 176.
Diffuse or assurgent, stiff-branched microphyllous shrubs said to attain 1 m, randomly armed with sets of 2 infrastipular often accompanied by 1 infrapetiolar, straight, ascending or horizontal, broad-based aculei 1.5-7 mm, the young stems, foliage, peduncles and flowers densely silky overall with fine ascending hairs less than 1 mm, the globose capitula solitary and paired on stemless or very shortly extended brachyblasts along annotinous branches.
Stipules subulate, linear or lance-attenuate 1.5-4 mm.
Leaf-formula (i-)ii-iv/(5-)6-10, the lf-stks (3-)4- 15(-18) mm, sometimes aculeolate dorsally, the ventral sulcus obscurely bridged between pinnapairs and sometimes spiculate; rachis of longer pinnae 4-12 mm, the exterior paraphyllidium of each sharply reflexed; lfts oblong or oblong-elUptic, obtuse or deltately subacute, the longer ones ±2.5-5 x 0.8-1.4 mm, 2.3-3.5 times as long as wide, nerveless extemally.
Peduncles 8- 22 mm; capitula without filaments 6-7.5 mm diam., moriform, the subglobose fl-buds silkypuberulent;yZower^ 5-merous 10-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx membranous, shallowly openly campanulate 0.5-0.65 mm, the subtruncate rim densely ciliolate; corolla turbinate-campanulate 3.2-3.8 mm, contracted at base into a neck ± as long as calyx, the ascending lobes ± half as long as tube; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.5-0.6 mm into a stemonozone, exserted 6.5- 7.5 mm; ovary densely puberulent.
Pods (few seen) 1-6 per capitulum, sessile, in profile linearoblong, straight or gently decurved, 15-25 X 5- 6 mm, 4-7-seeded, densely subvelutinously pilosulous overall, the replum sometimes minutely aculeolate but the fmit otherwise unarmed, the valves not seen ripe, thought by Britton to fall in one piece, but fracture-lines between seeds evident in some nearly mature pods, the dehiscence probably craspedial.
In mostly unrecorded habitats, to be expected in thom-scrub on calcareous substrates, known only from the border country along the PueblaOaxaca line at the s. edge of Tehuacan Desert, Mexico.-n. V-VI(-?).
56.
Mimosa texana (A. Gray) Small, Bull. New York Bot. Gard. 2:99.
1901. -Typus infra sub var. texana indicatur.
Diffuse or erect, stiffly widely branched shrubs attaining 2 m but commonly smaller, with flexuous, fuscous or in age blanched long-shoots randomly armed at some or all nodes with a solitary broad-based, gently recurved infrapetiolar aculeus sometimes accompanied by l(-2) smaller or simUar infrastipular ones, the primary lvs of longshoots (shed before anthesis) solitary, the small lvs associated with coeval, hemispherical or globose capitula fasciculate on depressed scaley brachyblasts along annotinous branches, the Ifaxes and peduncles thinly pubemlent, the green concolorous lfts facially glabrous, minutely ciliolate.
Stipules subtending primary lvs subulatesetiform or linear, l-3(-4) mm, those imbricated on brachyblasts mostly less than 1 mm, all weakly l(-3)-nerved.
Leaf-formula i-v(-vi)/3-9(-10), the lf-stks of primary lvs commonly 10-24 mm, of fasciculate ones 2-10 mm, the ventral sulcus either continuous or bridged but espiculate; rachis of longer pinnae in primary lvs 5-11 mm, in fasciculate 2-7(-9) mm, the lfts oblong or oblong-eUiptic, the longer ones (1.5-)2-4.5 mm, veinless or faintly 1-3-nerved dorsally.
Peduncles 6-20 mm; capitula without filaments 4.5-7 mm diam, the fl-buds narrowly obovoid, glabrous except at very tip, the receptacle 1-4.5 mm; flowers with calyx sessile, narrowly campanulate or turbinate-campanulate 1-1.6 mm, the tube glabrous, the depressed-deltate teeth minutely ciliolate; corolla 5-merous, glabrous extemally; filaments united below ovary into a very short stemonozone, exserted (2-)3-4.5 mm.
Pods commonly 2-9 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile linear or linear-oblong, gently recurved or straight, 18-35 x 4.5-6 mm, 3-7-seeded, the scarcely or shallowly constricted replum either unarmed or randomly aculeate along the ventral or along both sutures, the smooth, purplish-castaneous or red-brown valves low-colliculate over each seed, at least when young minutely sparsely puberulent and sometimes also minutely granular, when ripe separating from replum in one piece.
The morphological characters, vexed history, and nomenclature of Af. texana were studied in detail by Bameby & Isely (1986).
The specific concept is here slightly extended to include as a vicariant variety Mimosopsis filipes Britton & Rose.
Key to varieties of Af. texana 1.
Primary and fasciculate lvs strongly differentiated, the If-stk of the latter 2-7(-9) mm; lf-formula i-iv/3-7; receptacle of capitula 1-2 mm; Texas to n. Durango and s.-w. Tamaulipas. ... 56a. var. texana (p. 116).
1.
Primary and fasciculate lvs not much differentiated, the If-stk ofthe latter 7-15 mm; lf-formula i_v(-vi)/7-10; receptacle of capitula 2-4.5(-5) mm; s. Puebla and n. Michoacan 56b. var. filipes (p. 116).
56a. Mimosa texana (A. Gray) SmaU var. texana.
Af. texana (A. Gray) SmaU, Bull. New York Bot. Gard. 2: 99.
1901, sens, str., based on Af. borealis var. (?) texana A. Gray, PL wright.
1:61.
1852.-"159.
.
.
Hills near Austin, May, in flower; and on the western borders of Texas, in fruit.
Also in [Wright's] coll. of 1851 ."-Lectotypus (Isely, 197lb: 416): westem Texas, Wright s.n.,
fruct.,
GH!; isotypus, GH = NYNeg.
11983.
Mimosopsis wherryana Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 177.
1928.-"Southern Texas . .. Arroya del Tiegre [sic], between Roma and Zapata [Starr or Zapata Co., Texas], April 17, 1925, Small & Wherry 11930.''-Holotypus, NYl-Mimosa wherryana (Britton) Standley, Trop.
Woods 34: 40.
1933.
Mimosa lindheimeri ? var. pinnis 3-jugis etc.
A. Gray, PL wright.
2: 51.
1853.—"Prairies at the head of Los Moros, Western Texas . .. Wright 1363.""—Seen at NY! As described for the species and modified by key to varieties.
On hillsides and in washes, strongly but not exclusively calciphilous, scattered over s.-centr. and w. Texas (Balcones Escarpment w. over Edwards Plateau to trans-Pecos and head of Brazos river in Floyd Co.), s. through Coahuila and lower Grande valley to the lower Nazas river in n.- e. Durango, s. Coahuila, and along both slopes of Sa.
Madre Oriental to s. San Luis Potosi and s.-w. Tamaulipas.—FI.
III-V. 56b. Mimosa texana (A. Gray) Small var. filipes (Britton & Rose) Bameby, stat. nov. Mimosopsis filipes Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 177.
1928.—"Type from near San Luis Tultitlanapa, Puebla [Mexico], July, 1908, [C. A.] Purpus i 7 75. "
—Holotypus, NYl—Mimosa filipes (Britton & Rose) Gentry, Brittonia 6: 315.
1948, nom. illeg.; non Martius, 1838.
Af. pueblensis R. Grether, J. Amold Arbor.
68: 319.
1987.
As described for the species and modified by key to varieties.
In unknown habitats, but to be expected in seasonaUy deciduous matorral near 1500-2200 m, known only from s. Puebla and n. Michoacan, Mexico.-n. VI-VIII. Pringle described his plant from Michoacan as a smaU tree.
The status of this variety wiU need reassessment when the fmit is known, but at anthesis it can scarcely be distinguished from var. texana.
1991] B A R N E B Y : SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 111 57.
Mimosa borealis A. Gray, Mem. Amer. Acad. Arts II, 4(P1. fendler.,
novi-mex.): 39.
1849.- "[^.
Fendler] 181 .. .
Hillside, Upper Spring, on the Cimarron; August."
—Holotypus (Isely, 1971b: 416): GH! M.fragrans A. Gray, Boston J. Nat. Hist. 6:182.1850. — "... on the Pierdenales [Pedemales], April, in flower ([Lindheimeri] 606); May, with fruit (607)."—Lectotypus (Isely, 1971b: 416): Lindheimer 607, GH!; isoand syntypi, NY! Stiffly branched microphyllous shrubs attaining 12 dm but often depressed and as wide as tall, the usually straight, pungent-tipped longshoots randomly armed on intemodes with solitary broad-based, brown-tipped or in age blanched, straight or gently recurved, remotely infrapetiolar aculei 2-9 mm, glabrous except for minute tufts of crimped hairs on margin and inner face of brachyblast-stipules, at tip of most lf-stks and pinna-rachises, and on margin of calyx and corolla-lobes, the firm pale-green lfts concolorous, the umbelUform, spherical or hemispherical capitula solitary and geminate, fasciculate with lvs on hemispherical brachyblasts along annotinous branches, often forming long If-bracteate pseudoracemes.
Stipules of primary Ivs 1.5-3.5 mm, extemally nerveless or 1-nerved, those of brachyblasts triangular-subulate.
Leaf-formula (o-)i-iii(-iv)/(2-)3-7(-8), the pinnae of most primary lvs at least 2-jug., of most brachyblast-lvs 1-jug., exceptionally a few lvs simply pinnate; lf-stks (1-)3-30 mm, the petiole (1-)3-12 mm, bisulcate ventrally, the rachis (when present) 1-sulcate, spicules 0; rachis of conjugate pinnae (1.5-)3-12 mm, of distal pinnae of some primary lvs rarely attaining 25 mm, the lfts narrowly oblong or elliptic-oblanceolate to -obovate, weakly (1-)2(-3)-nerved dorsally, the longest ±3-6(-6.5) x 1-2.3 mm.
Peduncles at anthesis subcapillary (7-)10-23 mm; capitula without filaments 5-7 mm, prior to anthesis moriform; pedicels 0.4-1 mm; flowers (4-)5- merous diplostemonous; calyx turbinate 0.5-0.8 mm, the rim minutely denticulate; corolla turbinate 2.1-2.8 mm, the lobes free or almost so, the obtuse blade of each narrowed to a claw, this united with filaments into a stemonozone 0.3- 0.4 mm; filaments pink, exserted (2.5-)3-4.5 (-5) mm; ovary stipitate glabrous.
Pods 1-5 per capitulum, glabrous overaU, in profile undulately linearly, arched downward, the seminiferous body 25-60 X 6-10 mm, 3-8-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 4-9 mm, cuspidate at apex, the stout, usually deeply constricted replum smooth or randomly aculeate (especially along adaxial suture), the stiffly papery valves green subglaucescent, brown when ripe, buUately distended over each seed, tardily breaking up into articles 6-10(-12)mmlong.
In thom-scrub, on gullied hiUsides and eroded bluffs, becoming weedy on road-cuts and overgrazed rangeland, ±400-1250 m, preferring calcareous substrates, locally abundant, from upper Cimarron valley in far s.-w. Kansas and s.-e. Colorado s. through the Pecos valley in e. New Mexico and over the high plains to the s. edge of the Edwards Plateau in Texas (Isely, 1973, map 33, excluding some records for trans-Pecos Texas, referable to Af. turneri', cf. protologue, fig. 1).-H. IV-VI(-VII).
Notably different from kindred species in corolla-lobes free almost to base (Bameby, 1986, fig. 2).
58.
Mimosa turneri Bameby, Brittonia 38:4, fig. 2.
1986.—"United States.
Texas.
Presidio Co.: .
.
. along Rio Grande 21 road miles (34 km) upstream from Lajitas, 30 May 1985 (ripe pods, few flowers), R. Barneby 17970."—Holotypus, NY!; isotypi, TEX! US! Stiffly branched microphyllous shrubs attaining 2 m, with divaricate long-shoots clad in pallid shreddy epidermis and armed at or below most nodes with straight or recurved, early blanched aculei 1.5-5 mm, glabrous except for minutely filamentous-tomentellous stipules and randomly puberulent lf-stks, the subglobose capitula on brachyblasts along annotinous branches, the lvs dimorphic, those of long-shoots solitary, early deciduous, most fasciculate on hemispherical brachyblasts, the lfts firm, pale green or glaucescent concolorous.
Stipules 0.5-2 mm.
Leaf-formula of primary lvs i-ii(-iii)/2-3, of fasciculate lvs i/2, the petiole (1.5-)2-l 1(-14) mm, dorsiventrally compressed and 2-sulcate, a little dilated distally; lfts of distal pair 1.5-4 x 0.6-2 mm.
Peduncles 4-16(-20) mm; capitula without filaments (5-)6-8 mm diam.; pedicels 0.4-1.5 mm; flowers 5-merous 10-androus; calyx turbinate-campanulate 0.45-0.9 mm, the subtmncate rim glabrous or minutely ciliolate; coroUa 2-2.8 mm, the ovate lobes 0.5-1.1 mm; filaments pink. shortly monadelphous around stipe of ovary, exserted 3-4.3 mm.
Pods subsessile or shortly stipitate, the body in profile undulately linear, arched downward or twisted, (15-)25-60 x 5-8 mm, (2-)3-8(-9)-seeded, the replum either unarmed or the ventral suture with random erect aculei, the glabrous, when ripe brownish-stramineous valves buUately elevated over each seed, breaking up into individually dehiscent, free-falling articles 6-9 mm long. In desert matorral on limestone and volcanic substrates, 650-1500 m, apparently of bicentric range: along Rio Grande in trans-Pecos Texas (Hudspeth, Presidio and Brewster cos.) and presumably across river in Chihuahua, Mexico; in centr. Coahuila and adj. Nuevo Le6n, Mexico (Bameby, 1986, fig. 1, m a p ) . - n .
IV-V. Closely akin to Af. borealis, but different in the conventionally sympetalous corolla and simplified foliage, in this respect approaching the further specialized Af. unipinnata.
59.
Mimosa unipinnata Parfitt & Pinkava, Brittonia 30: 172, fig. 1.
1978.-"Mexico.
Coahuila: Cuatro Cienegas Basin, Sierra de San Marcos opposite Laguna Grande .
.
.
1000- 1500 m, 14 Aug 1975, Reeves & Pinkava P7i07i"—Holotypus, ASU (not seen); isotypus, NY! Stiffly branched microphyUous shrubs 5-12 dm with fuscous annotinous and pallid homotinous stems, the tiny, simply pinnate lvs and the peduncles of small, solitary or rarely geminate, globose capitula fasciculate on hemispherical brachyblasts covered with small scalelike, internally tomentulose stipules, the stems armed on many or most intemodes or immediately below some nodes with one stout, gently recurved infrapetiolar aculeus 2-5 mm, otherwise glabrous.
Stipules of primary lvs setiform, to 1.5 mm, of brachyblasts deltate or subulate less than 1 mm.
Leaf-formula 0/(1-)2(-3), the lf-stks (2-)3-16 mm, the petiole dilated upward 2.5-10(-12) mm, the usuaUy single interfoUolar segment 0.3-5 mm; lfts narrowly oblanceolate, oblong, elliptic-oblong, or narrowly obovate, obtuse,the distal pair 2-6 X 0.8-1.8 mm, beneath indistinctly 1-2- nerved, the subcentric midrib 2-3-branched distally.
Peduncles (5-)7-20 mm; capitula without filaments moriform 4-7 mm diam.; pedicels (0.2-)0.4-1.5 mm; flowers 4-merous (6-)8-androus, glabrous; calyx campanulate 0.4-0.5 mm, the teeth scarcely 0.1 mm; coroUa pink, narrowly turbinate 1.9-2.4 mm, the erect lobes membranous 0.5-0.9 mm, faintly 1-nerved; filaments monadelphous through 0.2-0.3 mm, exserted 3- 5.5 mm.
Pods undulately linear in profile, gently curved or straight, contracted at base into a short pseudostipe, the fertile body 35-75 x 8-10 mm, 4-8-seeded, the replum erratically short-aculeate, the smooth valves coUiculate over each seed, breaking up into free-falling articles to 9 mm long. On foothills of calcareous or gypseous desert mountains at ± 1000-1500 m, known only from the Cuatro Cienegas basin in lat. 26°25'-27°50'N, 101°30'-102°20'W, in centr. Coahuila, Mexico (Bameby, 1986, fig. 1, map).
60.
Mimosa zygophylla Bentham in A. Gray, PL wright.
1: 61.
1852.—"La Vaqueria towards San Juan, 30 miles from Saltillo [Coahuila], Wislizenus.
Near Saltillo and Monterey, Gr^g^."—Lectotypus (Britton & Rose, 1928: 175, by implication): Wislizenus 300, GH [caret K, 1986!]; syntypi, Gregg, 9 Apr and 22 May 1847, GH! ISrYl—Mimosopsis zygophylla (A. Gray) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 175.
1928.
Stiffly branched microphyllous shrubs 4-12 dm with rigid simple thorn-tipped long-shoots armed on intemodes with solitary, remotely infrapetiolar, brown or blanched, broad-based aculei 2- 4.5 mm and bearing lvs and small globose capitula together on hemispherical brachyblasts, appearing glabrous but stipules, tip of lf-stks, paraphyllidia and margin of calyx and corollalobes minutely tomentellous with crisped filamentous hairs, the minute plane lfts glaucescent when young, brunnescent when dry, nerveless on both faces.
Stipules of primary lvs subulate-setiform, of brachyblasts smaller, densely imbricate.
Leaf-formula i/1 (-2), the lf-stks 2-9 mm, 1-sulcate ventrally, 3-ribbed dorsally, espiculate; pinna-rachises less than 4 mm; lfts broad-elliptic or obovate-elliptic, less than 4 x 2.5 mm.
Capitula without filaments 4.5-5.5(-7) mm diam., in bud moriform globose, at anthesis often hemispherical, the flowers subsessile, 5-merous 10- androus; calyx campanulate 0.9-1.5 mm, the teeth depressed-deltate; coroUa (2.2-)2.4-3.8 mm, the 1-nerved lobes 1-1.2 mm; filaments pink. monadelphous through 0.2-0.6 mm, exserted 4- 5 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, in profile linear decurved, the 3-8-seeded body (20-)25-35 x 5- 7 mm, abmptly contracted proximally into a stipe ±3-4.5 mm, cuspidate at apex, the smooth glabrous, castaneous or livid-glaucescent valves separating in one piece from undulately constricted replum, this smooth or randomly remotely armed with falcate aculei 1-2.5 mm.
In matorral of calcareous or gypseous bajadas and outwash fans at 1400-2400 m, endemic to the Chihuahuan Desert in lat. 22-28°N, from centr. Coahuila s. to n. Zacatecas and adj. Durango, and to centr. S. Luis Potosi, Mexico (Barneby, 1986, fig. 1, m a p ) . - n .
II-VII. B(vi).
Series LEIOCARPAE Bentham Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Leiocarpae Bentham.
Af. sect. Habbasia ser. Leiocarpae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 391.
1841.-Sp. lectotypica: M. leiocarpa DeCandolle = M. arenosa var. leiocarpa (DeCandolle) Bameby.
Af. sect. Stachyomima Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 2: 133.
1840.—Sp. unica: M. schomburgkii Bentham.
Af. sect. Habbasia ser. Tomentosae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 390.
1841.—Sp. lectotypica: M. schomburgkii Bentham.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Leptostachyae Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 412.
1875, nom. illeg., encompassing typi of prior ser. Leiocarpae and ser. Tomentosae.
Schranckiastrum Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 16:151.1919.—Generitypus: S. insigneHassler = M. insignis (Hassler) Bameby.—Equated with Mimosa ser. Leptostachyae by Bameby, Brittonia 36: 248.
1984.
Trees, shrubs and subshrubs, either macroor (more often) microphyllidious, either armed or not, but the stems never serially aculeate.
Pubescence of short plain hairs and sometimes of longer gland-tipped hairs, of minute granular trichomes, and, in one small group, of arborescently branched or steUiform setulae, rarely 0, the lfts or fls (or both) of some charged in addition with superficial or immersed, colorless or golden glands.
Leaf-formula commonly in excess of iv/10, in few (Afm. ophthalmocentra, mensicola, sericantha) the pinnae only 1-4- or the lfts only 5-9-jug. Stipules linear or subulate, never dilated.
Flowers spicate (in Paraguayan Af. fiebrigii congested into eUipsoid capitula ± twice as long as diam.), basically 4-merous, the pink or white filaments free or united basaUy into an obscure stemonozone.
Fruit of most an either sessile or stipitate, linear or linear-oblong, planocompressed craspedium with papery or coriaceous valves and slender replum, the valves of Af. glutinosa suberously thickened and elevated over each seed, the fruit of Af. dalyi and Af. insignis narrowly linear subtorulose, bluntly tetragonal, with dilated replum and narrow continuous valves.
Spp. 28, most highly differentiated and numerous on the Brazilian Planalto and in adj. Bolivia and Paraguay, several in n.-e. and s. Atlantic Brazil, 4 either bicentrically or discontinuously dispersed from extra-Amazonian Brazil to n. South America, Central America, and s. Mexico, 1 naturalized in West Indies and few adventive elsewhere or cultivated; a doubtful sp. (Af. puberula) in upland tropical Mexico (Hidalgo).
The ser. Leiocarpae is equivalent to ser. Leptostachyae Bentham (1875:412-416) if deprived of these irrelevant elements: Af. warmingii, which = Newtonia glaziovii Brenan; Afm. pithecolobioides and lasiophylla, transferred to sect. Mimadenia ser. Glanduliferae', Andean Af. (ser. Bimucronatae) caduca; M. platycarpa, a spicate variety of ordinarily capitate Af. (ser. Acantholobae) acantholoba; and the pentamerous North American Afm. fasciculata (=M. rhododactyla var. benthamii), dysocarpa (including wrightii), guatemalensis, distachya, polyantha and laxiflora, all here transferred to a cognate ser. Distachyae.
These losses are, however, made up by species discovered since 1875, notably by Af. (formerly Schranckiastrum) insignis and its relative Af. dalyi, and Af. glutinosa, which have introduced into the series novel types of fmit.
As here redefined, the series Leiocarpae comprises five subsets of species, most easily visualized by study of the conspectus following, each of which might deserve some taxonomic status.
The six species first in order, which form the nomenclaturally typical nucleus of the series, are eglandular and have common-place planocompressed craspedia.
They differ collectively from ser. Bimucronatae only in spicate rather than capitate units of inflorescence.
The two next following are different only in the dilated replum and valvate dehiscence of the fruit.
All the remainder are to some extent glandular.
Among them Af. tenuiflora is somewhat isolated by a peculiar calyx and a buUately inflated, viscidsetulose craspedium.
The last four are distinto such Leiocarpae as Af. gemmulata by Af. coguished by indumentum of branched trichomes, ruscocaesia, which has stellate hairs on leafletreminiscent of the spicate members of sect. Calmargins but simply glandular and pubemlent coothamnos.
They are, however, indissolubly Unked roUa.
Conspectus of ser. Leiocarpae Mimosa * Lfts eglandular. t Pod a conventional piano-compressed craspedium.
61. arenosa (Willdenow) Poiret a. var. arenosa b. var. lysalgica Bameby c. var. leiocarpa (DeCandolle) Bameby 62. hapaloclada Malme 63. acutistipula Bentham a. var. acutistipula b. var. ferrea Bameby 64. dichroa Bameby 65. ophthalmocentra Martius 66. mensicola Bameby ft Pod bluntly tetragonal, the dilated replum ± as wide as valves.
67. dalyi Bameby 68. insignis (Hassler) Bameby ** Hypophyllum of lfts charged with either globose superficial or impressed lenslike glands. t t t Calyx 4-angulate and its teeth incurved; valves of craspedium buUately dilated and charged with glandtipped setulae; no stellate trichomes.
69. tenuiflora (Willdenow) Poiret t t t t Calyx campanulate or crateriform, the teeth erect; valves of craspedium not bullate (flat except in suberously coUiculate M. glutinosa), either eglandular or charged with sessile glands; no stellate trichomes except on Ift-margins of Af. coruscocaesia.
70. apodocarpa Bentham 71. xavantinae Bameby 72. interrupta Bentham 73. glutinosa Malme 74. hebecarpa Bentham 75. spixiana Bameby 76. sericantha Bentham 77. puberula Bentham 78. pteridifolia Bentham 79. adenophylla Taubert a. var. armandiana (Rizzini) Bameby b. var. adenophylla c. var. mitis Bameby 80. gemmulata Bameby a. var. gemmulata b. var. adamantina Bameby c. var. segrex Bameby d. var. cristallina Bameby e. var. occidentalis Bameby 81. amnis-atri Bameby 82. nothopteris Bameby 83. fiebrigii Hassler 84. coruscocaesia Bameby t t t t t Calyx and craspedium of the preceding, but hypophyllum of lfts, at least its midrib, charged with SteUate or verruciform trichomes; corolla usually stellate, but in Af. verrucosa only on margins of lobes.
85. verrucosa Bentham 86. schomburgkii Bentham 87. artemisiana Heringer & Paula 88. trianae Bentham Keys to species of ser. Leiocarpae Corolla glabrous, puberulent, or glandular-setulose, but nowhere stellate, all trichomes simple except in Af. coruscocaesia, the Ift-margins in this stellate-ciliolate.
2.
Known only from upper Moctezuma valley in Hidalgo, Mexico; an obscure species provisionally referred here 77.
Af. puberula (p. 143).
2.
South American only: subsidiary key 1, immediately following.
Corolla stellate overall or (Af. verrucosa) only on margin of lobes; stems and hypophyllum of lfts charged with stellately branched or verruciform and pubescent trichomes subsidiary key 2, page 123.
Subsidiary key 1.
Corolla nowhere stellate Macrophyllidous, the lfts of longer pinnae 2-10-jug. and the larger lfts 15-46 x 5-36 mm; pinnae of larger lvs 1-4-jug. 2.
Secondary venules of lfts produced to anastomosis with a marginal nerve (craspedodrome), this shallowly undulate-crenate; lfts of longer pinnae 2-5-jug.; native to n.-e. Brazil, planted elsewhere.
164.
Af. caesalpiniifolia (p. 256).
2.
Secondary venules of lfts brochidodrome within the entire, non-crenate margin; lfts of longer pinnae 5-10-jug.; interior Bahia and adj. Goias and Piaui.
3.
Pinnae 1-2-jug.; stems aculeate; fls glabrous; filaments white; Chapada Diamantina in cisfranciscan Bahia 66.
Af. mensicola (p. 131).
3.
Pinnae of larger lvs 2-4-jug.; stems unarmed; fls pubescent; filaments pink; transfranciscan Bahia, adj. Goias, and Piaui 76.
Af. sericantha (p. 142).
Microphyllidious, the lfts of longer pinnae 10-55-jug. and the larger lfts less than 13 mm long or 4.5 mm wide.
4.
Dorsal face of lfts dotted with sessile globose or lentiform glands, or minutely gland-punctate and resinous.
5.
Stems and If-axes tomentulose with arborescently villosulous setulae and margin of softly grayvillosulous lfts stellate; s-centr. Bahia and far n.-w. Minas Gerais.
.
84.
Af. coruscocaesia (p. 154).
5.
No arborescent or stellate setulae.
6.
Calyx 4-angulate by prominent ribs leading to cucuUately incurved lobes; pod stipitate, the papery valves viscid with mixed sessile and stipitate glands and buUately distended over each seed; widespread in Bahia, n. interruptedly to Venezuela and s. Mexico 69.
Af. tenuiflora (p. 135).
6.
Calyx terete, the ribs obscure or obsolete, the lobes plane; pod sessile or stipitate, planocompressed or, if coUiculate over each seed, the valves suberously thickened, in any case either eglandular or charged with minute sessile glands only.
7.
Plant glabrous except for minute glands scattered along lf-stks and on dorsal face of lfts; lf-formula iv-v/10-14, and the longer lfts 3-4.3 mm wide; extreme n.-w. comer of Minas Gerais 75.
Af. spixiana (p. 141).
7.
Plant puberulent or pilosulous as well as glandular, at least on lf-stks; either pinnae or lfts (or both) more numerous, if lfts scarcely so (14-20) then all less than 2 mm wide.
8.
Filaments white; pod sessile or almost so, 8-13 mm wide.
9.
Calyx 0.7-1.1 mm; larger lfts 3-5 x 0.7-1.2 mm; n. and e.-centr. Goias 70.
Af. apodocarpa (p. 137).
9.
Calyx less than 0.5 mm; in range of the last the larger lfts (5.5-)6-10 x 1.3-3 mm; s.-w. Goias and Mato Grosso to Paraguay.
10.
Lfts dotted beneath with yellow lentiform glands; lobes of coroUa thinly pilosulous and yellow-glandular dorsally; pod planocompressed, the replum 0.7-1 mm wide, the valves papery, not differentiated into exocarp and endocarp.
71.
Af. xavantinae (p. 137).
10.
Lfts minutely gland-punctate and resinously lustrous beneath; lobes of corolla resinous, the superficial secretory cells sometimes drying out to minute whitish scales; pod either planocompressed or the valves suberously elevated over each seed, but when the valves plane then differentiated into livid exocarp and crustaceous endocarp and the replum then 1.2-1.7 mm wide.
11.
Annotinous and homotinous branchlets fuscous-livid; rachis of longer pinnae 5-6 cm, the interfoliolar segments 2-3.3 mm; longer lfts (4-)6-9.5 x (0.9-) 1.3-3 mm; pod planocompressed, the valves and replum as just described; s. Maranhao to s.-w. Goias and s. Mato Grosso (Norte) 72.
Af. interrupta (p. 138).
11.
Annotinous and homotinous branchlets whitish or sordidly paflid; rachis of longer pinnae 2-3 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.8-1 mm; longer lfts 3-4 X 0.8-1.3 mm; valves of pod suberously elevated over each seed; Paraguay and adj. Mato Grosso do Sul 73.
Af. glutinosa (p. 140).
8.
Filaments normally pink (white in one known population of Af. hebecarpa); pod (unknown in most of M. adenophylla and Af. amnis-atri) commonly stipitate and 4-7 mm wide, if sessile not over 6 mm wide.
12.
Fls congested into dense ellipsoid capitula 7-8 x 4 mm; Paraguay 83.
M. fiebrigii (p. 152).
12.
Fls disposed in elongate amentiform spikes.
13.
Fl-spikes arising from axils of annotinous (often of already shed) lvs, developing coetaneously with new leafy shoots; valves of pod densely pilosulous as weU as glandular; Mato Grosso and s.-w. Goias. .. 74.
Af. hebecarpa (p. 140).
13.
R-spikes arising from new branchlets, together forming a partly leafy-bracteate or a leafless exserted pseudoraceme or panicle terminal to homotinous branchlets.
14.
Stems and sometimes also lf-stks aculeate.
15.
Rachis of longer pinnae (3.5-)4.5-8 cm, the interfoliolar segments mostly 1.5-2.5 mm, the lfts dorsally concave and those of longer pinnae (18-)23-36-jug., the longer lfts 4-8 x 1.3-3 mm; s. Bahia and Minas Gerais; vars. adenophylla and armandiana of: 79.
Af. adenophylla (p. 145).
15.
Rachis of longer pinnae 1.2-2.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments mostly 0.8-1.3 mm, the lfts plane and those of longer pinnae to 14-17-jug., the longer lfts 3.2-4.5 x 0.7-1.3 mm; extreme n. Bahia near border of Piaui 82.
Af. nothopteris (p. 152).
14.
Stems and lf-stks unarmed.
16.
Pinnae 4-7-jug.; local in n. Bahia; var. mitis of: 19.
M. adenophylla (p. 145).
16.
Pinnae of larger lvs 9-multijug.
17.
Lfts relatively broad-oblong, concave dorsally, the margin loosely revolute, the longer blades 3-5.5 mm; no interpinnal spicules; transfranciscan Bahia and Minas Gerais, thence w. through centr. and s. Goias to e. Mato Grosso 78.
Af. pteridifolia (p. 144).
17.
Lfts plane; widespread over Brazilian Planalto but, where sympatric with the last, the lfts only 1.2-3 mm; a spicule between all or at least between some distal pairs of pinnae.
18.
Pinnae at once very numerous (of larger lvs 35-49-jug.) and short (the rachis 7-18 mm), and lfts minute (to 1.2-1.6 x 0.45-0.6 mm); known only from headwaters of rio Parana in e.-centr. Goias 81.
Af. amnis-atri (p. 151).
18.
Pinnae to 10-38-jug., but less than 30-jug. when as short as in the preceding and, if more than 30-jug., the rachis 25 mm upward; widespread in cisfranciscan Bahia and Minas Gerais, local w.-ward; disjunct in Venezuela 80.
Af. gemmulata (p. 147).
4.
Dorsal face of lfts eglandular.
19.
Unarmed arborescent shmbs of e. Bolivia, immediately adj. Brazil (Mato Grosso) and Paraguay, with linear, bluntly tetragonal pods shallowly constricted between seeds, and replum as wide as or a Uttle wider than the valves, the whole pod 2.5-3 mm in greatest diam; lfts dorsally 3-nerved from pulvinule, the costa centric, the anterior and posterior nerves of equal strength, submarginal, and each produced almost or quite to blade's apex.
20.
Pinnae 3-10-jug., arising 6-20 mm apart along If-stk, the rachis of longer ones 6-12 cm; a spicule between each pair of pinnae; longer lfts 6-10 mm; fls simply pubemlent; corolla and filaments white; articles of pod 9-12 mm long; Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazfl and adj. Paraguay 68.
Af. insignis (p. 134).
20.
Pinnae 18-31-jug., arising 4-6.5 mm apart along If-stk, the rachis of longer ones 3.5-4.5 cm; no interpinnal spicules; longer lfts 2.5-4 mm; fls at once puberulent and minutely mfous-lepidote; corolla and filaments pink; articles of pod 6-9 mm long; e. Bolivia 67.
M. dalyi (p. 134).
19.
Allopatric, and the pods linear planocompressed, their valves many times wider than the slender replum; venulation of lfts various, but if the nerve anterior to costa present then this short and much weaker than the posterior one, expiring far short of blade's apex.
21.
Lfts membranous, nearly all less than 2 mm wide, their costa unbranched; pod at once stipitate and 3.5-5.5 mm wide.
22.
Pinnae of larger lvs 4-10(-l 2)-jug.; corollas commonly glabrous, the lobes rarely charged dorsally with a few minute hairs; filaments normally white (exceptionally pinkish in age); cauline aculei, when present, (1-)2-6 mm; widespread and common in Atlantic Brazil from Ceara and Rio Grande do Norte s. to Rio de Janeiro, casual in extratropical Brazil; Venezuela and Colombia, n. interruptedly to s. Mexico; Lesser Antilles; introduced in Puerto Rico 61.
Af. arenosa (p. 123).
22.
Pinnae oflarger lvs (9-) 12-19(-20)-jug.; corollas pilosulous;filamentspale pink; cauline aculei few and not over 1.5 mm; interior planaltine Brazil (Goias and Mato Grosso).
62.
Af. hapaloclada (p. 127).
21.
Lfts firmly chartaceous, the midrib on dorsal face commonly giving rise to 1-2 secondary venules, if the costa simple then the larger lfts over 2 mm wide; pod (unknown in Af. dichroa) either sessile or, if stipitate, 6.5-9.5 mm wide; Brazil s. of the Amazon (if brought hither byfloweringplant from n.-w. Venezuela, Colombia, or n.-ward, see Af. arenosa var. leiocarpa, p. 126, if by pink-fld plant from Maranhao, see Af. paraibana fma.,
p. 171).
23.
Corolla oblong-campanulate, angulately 4-ribbed, the lobes erect-connivent at anthesis; pod sessile; e. Brazil, from Rio Grande do Norte to Bahia, where widespread 65.
Af. ophthalmocentra (p. 130).
23.
Corolla turbinate-campanulate, not angulate, the lobes spreading at anthesis; pod (of relatively common Af. acutistipula) stipitate; e. Para to w. Pernambuco, s. to n.-e. Mato Grosso, s.-centr. Bahia and s.-e. Goias.
24.
Ordinarily aculeate (but some foliate branchlets unarmed); lvs variable, but the axis of longer pinnae 3-6(-6.5) cm and lfts commonly less than 2 mm wide, if wider than the costa dorsally pinnate; corollas glabrous or at tip microscopically papillose-puberulent; ovary glabrous or minutely glandular-pubemlent; widespread over the range just indicated 63.
Af. acutistipula (p. 127).
24.
Unarmed; lvs ample, the rachis of longer pinnae 6-9.5 cm and the larger lfts 7- 11.5 X 2-2.7 mm, simply 1-nerved dorsally; corollas at least thinly gray-strigulosepilosulous above middle; ovary pilosulous; local in e.-centr. Goias and adj. Bahia.
64.
Af. dichroa (p. 129).
Subsidiary key 2.
Corolla stellate overall or at tip of lobes 1.
Corolla stellate only on tip of lobes; filaments pink; e. Brazil 85.
Af. verrucosa (p. 155).
1.
Corolla densely stellate overall; filaments whitish; widespread.
2.
Hypophyllum of lfts thinly stellate especially along midrib.
3.
Corollas 1.7-2.5 mm, 2-2.5 times as long as calyx; posterior basal lobe of lfts (measured from pulvinule) 0.4-1.1 mm long; n.-e. Brazil (Roraima), Guyana, s.-e. Venezuela; e. Honduras; planted in extra-Amazonian Brazil, perhaps native in Pernambuco 86.
Af. schomburgkii (p. 156).
3.
Corollas 2.8-4.1 mm, 2.5-3 times as long as calyx; posterior basal lobe of lfts (measured from pulvinule) 1-1.7 mm; Atlantic slope of Brazil from s. Bahia to s.-e. Minas Gerais 87.
Af. artemisiana (p. 158).
2.
Hypophyllum of lfts densely white-tomentulose overaU with overlapping stellae; local in n.-e. Colombia 88.
Af. trianae (p. 159).
61.
Mimosa arenosa (Willdenow) Poiret, Encycl. suppl. 1: 66.
1810.—Typus infra sub var. arenosa indicatur.
Potentially arborescent shrubs and trees attaining 6 m with trunk to 15 cm diam., sometimes precociously flowering as diffuse or scrambling subshrubs 1-2 m, either unarmed or erratically armed on intemodes (but only exceptionally on back of lf-stks) with erect, recurved or (var. lysalgica) antrorsely curved, broad-based aculei (1-)2-6 mm, the young branchlets, lf-stks and axis of inflorescence pilosulous with soft fine incurved or spreading, whitish or cream-colored hairs to 0.2-0.5 mm intermixed with few or many minute livid granules, the thin-textured plane, facially glabrous or thinly pilosulous lfts bicolored, olivaceous above, paler and minutely pallid-dotted beneath, the moderately dense spikes of white, mostly glabrous but rarely pubemlent fls at first axillary to expanded lvs, often later forming a shortly exserted pseudoraceme or narrow panicle.
Stipules firm, narrowly lanceolate or Unear-attenuate 2-5 x 0.4-0.9 mm, 1-3- nerved, the midrib becoming bluntly prominulous dorsally, the blade long persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-11 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 5- 15 mm, at middle 0.3-0.7 mm, the longer interpinnal segments (4-)5-l 2(-l 3) cm, the ventral groove bridged between pairs of pinnae and spiculate or not; pinnae of larger lvs (cave: absent from some specimens) 4-10(-12)-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 16- 45(-60) mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.7-2.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 12-30(-42)- jug., the first pair 0.6-1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia directed retrorsely from axis of pinna, all in outline narrowly oblong or linear, acute or abruptly acuminulate, straight or subfalcate, the longer ones 3-6.5 x 0.7-2 mm, 3-6 times as long as wide, all veinless or almost so on upper face, beneath finely 2—4-nerved from pulvinule, the slightly displaced costa discolored but mostly immersed except just above the pulvinule, the 1 or in var. leiocarpa 2-3 posterior nerves weak and short.
Flower-spikes solitary or commonly geminate (at times paired with a branchlet), the axis including very short peduncle (3-)3.5-7 cm; bracts Unear or linear-elliptic 0.35- 0.9 mm, caducous; fl-buds plumply obovoid, glabrous or rarely pubemlent; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, in some spikes many staminate; calyx membranous, shallowly or shortly campanulate 0.35-0.75(-0.85) mm, contracted at base into a minute drum-shaped pedicel no longer than wide, the low-deltate, glabrous or ciliolate lobes 0.1- 0.2 mm; corolla white, broadly turbinate 2-2.5 mm, the ovate subacute lobes 1-1.4 x 0.7-0.9 mm, not or scarcely callous at apex; filaments white or cream-white, exceptionally pallid-roseate in fading, exserted (3-)3.5-5(-6) mm; ovary either glabrous or thinly pilosulous laterally, commonly granular.
Pods loosely ascending, stipitate, the slender glabrous or thinly pilosulous, straight or arcuate stipe 4-8 mm, the planocompressed linear body (26-)30-60(-70) x 4- 6(-7) mm, cuneately contracted at base, more abruptly apiculate at apex, the obscurely or shallowly undulate replum 0.3-0.5(-0.8) mm wide, the glabrous or early glabrate, often remotely granular but not viscid, deUcately venulose valves low-colliculate over each seed, at first green lustrous, then fuscous-stramineous, scarcely 0.05 mm thick in section, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into 7-10(-l 1) segments 4-6 mm long; seeds obtusely rhombic in wide profile, 3.2-4.3 x 2.5-3.5 mm, the fuscous-olivaceous or light brown testa microscopically granular.
Mimosa arenosa resembles in many respects the partly sympatric M. tenuiflora, which differs, however, in resinously glandular foliage, hooded calyxand coroUa-lobes, and viscid-glandular pod buUately distended over each seed.
Like Af. tenuiflora, and for no more pressing reason, the present species has been known by different names in its widely dissevered areas of dispersal north and south of Amazonia, but the hazy distinctions in form of inflorescence and proportions of flower-parts by which Bentham (1875: 416) distinguished a Brazilian Af. malacocentra from a Venezuelan Af. arenosa can no longer be maintained.
Most Venezuelan populations of var. arenosa have slightly longer (0.5-0.8, not 0.35- 0.5 mm) and therefore more deeply campanulate calyces, but I have found no supporting differences.
Alike in Venezuela and Brazil the leaflets of Af. arenosa vary from glabrous ciliolate to pubescent on both faces, but the modes of variation are different.
In Venezuela the two types are erratically sympatric; both occur commonly around Caracas, and have been collected together in Lara (Pittier 13095, NY).
In Brazil pubescent leaflets seem to occur only locally in north-central Minas Gerais and are commonly accompanied by cauline aculei curved upward, of a type foreign to the species elsewhere.
I recognize this form as a weakly differentiated var. lysalgica.
In arid northeastern Colombia and northwestern Venezuela the species is represented by plants of a slightly anomalous type to which the name Af. leiocarpa has been applied.
Bentham (1875: 416) maintained this provisionally as a species but admitted to an inexact memory of the typus, collected at Sta. Marta by Bertero.
He thought that Af. leiocarpa might be separable from Af. arenosa by greater number of pinnae and glabrous foliage, but these distinctions have lost cogency in the course of time.
We now know that the leaf-formula on Sta. Marta is quite plastic and, as already noted, glabrous and villosulous forms of Af. arenosa are sometimes sympatric and otherwise identical.
Nevertheless Af. leiocarpa does differ from typical Af. arenosa in some small features of the foliage and may appropriately be maintained as a third variety.
Disjunct populations of Af. arenosa in southern Pacific Mexico seem also to belong here.
Key to varieties of M. arenosa Sulcus of If-stk both bridged and spiculate between pairs of pinnae; paraphyllidia retrorse; lfts 2-nerved dorsally, the costa usually simple; widespread from n. Venezuela to s.-e. Brazil; Dominica and Martinique; adventive in Puerto Rico.
2.
Aculei (when present) mostly recurved; lfts (in Brazil) of longer pinnae (14-)15-27-jug., 0.7-1.2 mm wide, facially glabrous, ciliolate; corolla glabrous; of bicentric dispersal: interior and Caribbean Venezuela to Martinique; e. Brazil, from Ceara and Rio Grande do Norte to Rio de Janeiro 61a. var. arenosa (p. 125).
2.
Aculei (always present, usually many) mostly antrorsely incurved; lfts of longer pinnae ± 12-15-jug., 1-2 mm wide, thinly pilosulous on both faces; corolla puberulent distally; local in highland centr. and n.-centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil 61b. var. lysalgica (p. 125).
Sulcus of If-stk simply bridged, the spicule wanting; paraphyllidia minute ascending; lfts usually weakly 3^-nerved dorsally, the costa at least faintly pinnate beyond mid-blade; n.-w. Venezuela, n.-e. Colombia, and disjunct in s. Mexico (Guerrero, Oaxaca) 61c. var. leiocarpa (p. 126).
61a. Mimosa arenosa (Willdenow) Poiret var. arenosa.
Af. arenosa Poiret, 1810, I.e., sens, str. Acacia arenosa Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1060.
IS06.—^'Habitat ad Caracas in ripis arenosis fluviorum.
.
.
Bredemeyer."
—Holotypus, J?r^- demeyer 18, B-WILLD 19134, seen in microfiche!; isotypus, W (hb. Jacquin.)! Acacia malacocentra Martius [Hort. reg. monac. 188.
1829, nom. nud.].
Flora 20(Beibl.
2): 106.
1837.- "In monte Corcovado ... in sylvis Catingas dictis provinciae mediterraneae Bahiensis frequens "—Holotypus, Herb. Mart.
143, BR! = NY Neg. 11564; isotypi, BM! E! G! K! M!,
NY! W!; presumed paratypus, Martius 2229, "in deserto prov. Bahiensis pr. Sto. Antonio das Cucimadas," M! — Mimosa malacocentra (Martius) Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 415.
1875 & m Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 360.
1876.
Mimosa xantholasia Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 88.
1846.—"Venezuela, Funcke, n. 383."—Holotypus, Funck & Schlim 383, "Leonias, Caracas.,
" K!; isotypus, G!—Equated with Af. arenosa by Bentham, 1875:415.
M. malacocentra var. angustifolia Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 360, 1876, ex parte, quoad Burchell 818-3, exclus. lectotypo, qui = Af. acutistipula.
M. fasciculata var. ernestiana [sic] O. Kuntze, Rev. gen. pi. 1: 198.
1891.—".. . von Professor Ernst im Caracas als Acacia fasciculata bestimmt ... La Guayra."
—Holotypus, O. Kuntze 1194, collected 7.
V.1874 (fl) near La Guaira, D.F.,
Venezuela, NY! Af. leiocarpa sensu Bentham, 1841: 391; non DeCandolle.
Af. arenosa sensu Steyermark & Huber, Fl.
Avila lam. 169B. 1878; Lewis, 1987, fig. 8K (pod).
Cauline aculei mostly decurved, sometimes lacking; lfts facially glabrous or (only in Venezuela) pilosulous, varying from narrowly linear to Unear-oblong, the longer ones 3-6.5 x 0.7- 1.6 mm; corolla glabrous.
Seasonally dry brush-woodlands, chaparral and kindred communities, sometimes in low places flooded during rainy periods, often forming thickets and becoming weedy in disturbed places and along highways, intermptedly widespread from the s.-e. periphery of the Caribbean s. to s.-e. Brazil: in Brazil scattered, in caatinga, restinga and mata do cipo, mostly below 450 m, from Ceara and Rio Grande do Norte s. to Rio de Janeiro and Guanabara, in Minas Gerais and Bahia cisfranciscan only, planted in Distrito Federal; in Venezuela along the Caribbean coast and in seasonally dry interior valleys, 10-1000 m., from Lara and Tachira e. to Nueva Esparta and n.-e. Bolivar (Altoplanicie de Nuria); Dominica and Martinique; locally adventive in Puerto Rico. - F l . in BrazU II-IV, VI-VIII, in Venezuela VI-VII, X-L—In Brazil, Jurema branca, calumbi preto, rasga beiqo, amorosa, calango cego; in Venezuela, narauli, cuji.
Map 8.
61b. Mimosa arenosa (Willdenow) Poiret var. lysalgica Bameby, var. nov., a var. arenosa paesertim aculeis caulinis numerosis antrorsus incurvis, ulterius ab ejus formis brasiliensibus foliolis pro rata latiusculis 1-2 (nec 0.7-1.2) mm latis utrinqe parce pUosulis necnon corolla apicem versus puberula diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: mun. Felixlandia, 30 km w. of Curvelo, 750 m, 22.11.1975 (fl), W. R. Anderson MIMOSA ARENOSA: var. ARENOSA# var. LEIOCARPA© var. LYSALGICA© MAP 8.
Mexico and tropical South America.
Range of M arenosa (Willdenow) Poiret. (with Hatschbach, Barneby & Gates) 11523. — Holotypus, MBM; isotypi, K, NY, R, US. CavH^neprickles mostly forwardly incurved, few subhorizontal; leaflets pilosulous on both faces, the largest 3-6 x 1-2 mm; corolla-lobes thinly pilosulous dorsally.
In cerrado and disturbed brush-woodland, 600- 950 m, local on both slopes of Sa. do Espinhago in n.-centr. and centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil, lat. ±16°30'-19°S (Grao Mogol; Corinto; Felixlandia).—Fl. ll-lV.—Angiquim, the leaves fumishing, according to Mexia, an analgesic tisane, whence the epithet.
Map 8.
61c. Mimosa arenosa (Willdenow) Poiret var. leiocarpa (DeCandolle) Bameby, stat. nov. M. leiocarpa DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 429.
1825 (nov) & Mem. Legum. 427.
1826 Gan).-"ad Sanctam-Martam, Bertero."
—Holotypus, Bertero s.n. commun.
Balbis 1822, G-DC! = F Neg. 6983.
Acacia nutans [DeCandolle, 1825-1826, I.e., pro syn.] K. Sprengel, Syst. veg. 3: 141.
1826.-"Ad fl. Magdalena [Colombia]."—Apparently based on an isotypus ofthe preceding, but this not known to survive.
M. caudero Cardenas, Emstia40: 15,figs.7, 8.
1986.— "Venezuela: Edo.
Lara: Caudero tunio [nomen vernac] .. . a lo largo de la quebrada La Esperanza, entre Sique-Sique y Baragua, 350 m.s.m.
29-VIII- 1981, en flor, fruto.
Marisela Ponce y Baltasar Tmjillo N" 340."—Holotypus, MY (not seen); paratypi, Cardenas 2524, 2895, 2897, 2899, 2913, 3010, 3011 & Ruiz & Rondon 3660, afl NY! Mimosa leiocarpa sensu Britton & Killip, 1936: 152.
Pinnae 5-12- and Ifts 13-42-jug., otherwise as given in key to varieties.
On arid hiUsides and shores, sometimes in chaparral or brush-savanna ecotone, 10-700 m, locally plentiful near the coastal foothiUs of Guajira and Sa.
Nevada de Sta. Marta in n. Magdalena, Colombia, e. in Venezuela to state of Falcon and the Sabana de Carora in interior Lara; disjunct on the Pacific coast of Mexico, from Guerrero to isthmus of Tehuantepec in Oaxaca.—FI.
VII-XII, IV. —Caudero, cabudero (Venezuela).
Map 8.
Variation in leaf-formula between populations of var. leiocarpa in Sta. Marta is unexpectedly wide, ranging from v-vi/13-18 (H. H. Smith 2066, NY) to xii/37 (Bertero, holotypus) or xixii (H. H. Smith 302, W)r).
The plants seen from Lara have leaf-formulae of ±vii-x/37-42, and one fmiting specimen (Pittier 12615, W>[) has pods unusually wide (7 mm) for the species as a whole.
62.
Mimosa hapaloclada Malme, Bih.
Kongl.
Svenska Vetensk.-Akad.
Handl.
25, Afd.
3(11): 40.
1900.—"Matto Grosso: Cuyaba (in 'cerrado' denso. [3.1.1894].
MALME 1308.
Rorigera.)."—Holotypus, S (not seen); isotypi, BM! F! = F Neg. 54837, G! US! M. hapaloclada sensu Malme, 1931: 52 (descriptio leguminis), fig. 8(b) = Malme s.n.,
19.
IV.1902, S! Microphyllidious arborescent shrubs attaining 4 m, with smooth thin-barked tmnk and subterete, pliantly homotinous branchlets armed with distant erect straight intemodal or partly infrastipular aculei ±1-1.5 mm, the young stems, lf-stks and all axes of inflorescence variably graypubemlent with fine simple hairs, the lfts either glabrous facially or dorsally pubemlent, the inflorescence a pseudoraceme of lax fl-spikes at anthesis exserted 1-1.5 dm from foliage but sometimes hysteranthously leafy-bracteate.
Stipules erect fumlance-linear-attenuate ±5-% X 0.3- 0.5 mm, persistent.
Leaf-stalks, ±7-12 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus ±5-9 x 0.7-0.8 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-7 mm, the ventral groove interrupted between each pair of pinnae by an ascending spicule; pinnae (9-) 14- 19(-20)-jug., little graduated, the axis of longer ones ±2-2.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-0.7 mm; Ifts of longer pinnae 27-38- jug., the first pair ±0.5 mm distant from small subulate paraphyllidia, the plane thin-textured blades all linear-oblong from semicordate base, subacute at apex, those at mid-rachis ±3-3.5 x 0.5-0.8 mm, ±4-6 times as long as wide, aU 1 -nerved dorsally, smooth above.
Flower-spikes 2-3 per node, their axis including short peduncle 4-5 cm; bracts linear 0.8-1.4 mm caducous; flbuds ovoid, gray-pilosulous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx pubemlent turbinate 0.4-0.6 mm, the triangular teeth 0.2-0.3 mm; corollas 1.5-2.2 mm, pilosulous extemally, the narrowly ovate submembranous lobes 1-1.2 x 0.5-0.6 mm, faintly 1-nerved; filaments pale pink, free to base, exserted 4.5-5 mm; ovary stipitate, the body densely villosulous.
Pod ascending stipitate, the slender stipe 3-5 mm, the linear planocompressed body in profile ±25-35 X 3.5-5 mm, straight or almost so, the replum ±0.25 mm wide, shallowly constricted between seeds, the papery brown, delicately reticulate valves separating when ripe from replum and breaking up into 5- 7 oblong-eUiptic articles 5-7(-8) mm long, the whole at maturity very thinly pubemlent and remotely granular; seeds elliptic compressed 3.8 X 2 mm, the testa fuscous dull.
In cerrado, ±200-600 m, of local distribution on the Brazilian Planalto: vicinity of Cuiaba, Mato Grosso, where first collected by Antonio da Silva Manso in 1830-1832; and in the valleys of rios Bezerra and dos Macacos tributary to rio Parana in e.-centr. Goias, there said to be locally dominant.—H. XII-III. Mimosa hapaloclada was compared in the protologue with M. apodocarpa, which is clearly different in dorsally gland-dotted leaflets, white filaments, and essentially sessile, gland-sprinkled and much broader pod.
In general aspect and most details M. hapaloclada resembles allopatric M. arenosa, which has similar membranous leaflets and eglandular vesture together with a slender stipitate pod; but the latter has scarcely half as many pairs of pinnae, commonly glabrous (not pilosulous) corolla, and white (not pink) filaments.
63.
Mimosa acutistipula (Martius) Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 391.
1842, based on Acacia acutistipula Martius, Flora 20(Beibl.
2): 107.
1837.—Typus sub var. acutistipula indicatur.
Tall shrubs and treelets attaining 4-5 m, commonly armed on intemodes with tough broadbased blackish, either erect or forwardly curved aculei 1.5-5 mm, but some leafy branchlets (perhaps some whole trees) unarmed, the homotinous growth pilosulous throughout or almost so with fine erect plain hairs 0.1-0.3 mm mixed with minute livid granules, the olivaceous lfts concolorous or slightly paler beneath, often bmnnescent in drying, the firm plane lfts either puberulent on both faces or glabrous ciliolate, the inflorescence a pseudoraceme or narrow fewbranched panicle of fl-spikes either fully exserted from foliage or leafy-bracteate proximaUy.
Stipules erect firm, subulate or linear-lanceolate 2-7 X 0.7-0.9 mm, pubemlent within and without. bluntly 1-nerved dorsally, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 3.5-10 cm, the petiole including oblong-eUipsoid Uvid pulvinus 7-16 x 0.5-0.9 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 7-13 mm, the ventral sulcus intermpted between pinnae by a bridge sometimes produced into an inconspicuous pubemlent spicule; pinnae of major lvs 4- 10(-1 l)-jug., the lowest a little shorter than the rest, the rachis of distal ones (2.5-)3-5.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.3-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20-3 l(-33)-jug., the first pair 0.7- 1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia erect or deflexed from pinna-axis, the blades in outline narrowly oblong or broadly Unear, abruptly acute, the longer ones usually ±5-7 x 1.2-1.6 mm, in s. Bahia to 10(-12.5) x 2.5 mm, aU veinless above, the moderately displaced midrib and 1 (-2) posterior nerves from pulvinule slenderly prominulous dorsally, the midrib giving rise on each side near and beyond mid-blade to (1-)2 (-3) secondary venules.
Flower-spikes l-3(-4) per node of inflorescence, the axis including short peduncle 2-7.5(-8) cm; bracts narrowly elliptic or oblanceolate 0.6-1 mm, caducous; fl-buds plumply obovoid, not angulate, usually glabrous, sometimes microscopically papillate or puberulent at apex; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, many or almost all in some spikes staminate; calyx membranous campanulate 0.5-0.7 mm, the lowdeltate teeth ±0.1 mm, the rim minutely ciliolate, often with a few gland-tipped trichomes; corolla turbinate-campanulate or obovoid-turbinate 1.8-2.1 mm, whitish pink-tinged or in age bright pink, the ovate plane or slightly concave 1-nerved lobes 0.8-1.1 x 0.7-0.85 mm; filaments white or cream-colored, free, the longer ones exserted 3.2-4.3 mm; ovary short-stipitate, glabrous or microscopically glandular-pubemlent.
Pod stipitate, the stipe 5-9 mm, the broadlinear planocompressed body (45-)50-70(-75) x 7-9.5 mm, cuneately tapering at base, obtuse at apex, when well fertilized 6-9(-10)-seeded, the straight or very shallowly undulate replum 0.4- 0.7 mm wide, the papery lustrous purplish-red but bmnnescent or finally blackish, glabrous or microscopically pubemlent valves delicately reticulate-venulose and granular, breaking up into free-falling, inertly dehiscent articles 5-7 mm long; seeds discoid ±5-5.8 x 4-5 mm, the brown testa smooth but not highly lustrous.
Due to a general similarity in foliage and in white flower-spikes M. acutistipula and M. arenosa have often been confused in herbaria, but may be distinguished at anthesis by shape of the flower and in fmit by presence or absence of stipe; for details see key to ser. Leiocarpae.
The more tenuous differences between M. acutistipula and M. dichroa, of which the pod is as yet unknown, are mentioned under the latter.
While the individual flower and pod of M. acutistipula remain virtually constant in size and form over the whole range of the species, there is a marked difference between groups of more southern and more northem dispersal in leaf-formula and in length and density of the flower-spikes.
I therefore propose to distinguish two varieties.
Key to varieties of M. acutistipula 1.
Pinnae of larger lvs 4-7-jug.; axis oflonger spikes (including peduncle) 2-4.5 cm; centr. Piaui and w. Pernambuco s. through S. Francisco valley to s.-centr. Bahia and s.-e. Goias, to be expected in n.-w. comer of Minas Gerais; cultivated at Brasilia, adj. Goias, and Rio de Janeiro 63a. var. acutistipula (p. 128).
1.
Pinnae of larger lvs 7-10(-l l)-jug.; axis of longer spikes (including peduncle) 5-8 cm; e. Para, Maranhao, and n.-e. Mato Grosso 63b. var. ferrea (p. 129).
63a. Mimosa acutistipula (Martius) Bentham var. acutistipula.
Acacia acutistipula Martius, 1837, I.e.—"In pratis udis Varedas dictis [on upper rio Caninde near 44°W, 8°15'S] in prov. Piauhiensi: fl. Apr. Maio."
—Holotypus, collected IV ["V"].1819, M! = FNeg 6174 = IPA Neg. 1339.
M. malacocentra var. angustifolia Bentham in Martius, n. bras 15(2): 360.
1876.-".. . prope Rio de Janeiro: Martius, Burchefl 818-3, 2783."—Lectotypus, Burchell 2783, K! = NY Neg. 11661; isotypus, GH!; syntypus, Martius s.n.,
BRl—Burchell 818-3 = M. arenosa (Willd.) Poir. var. arenosa.
M. acutistipula sensu Bentham, 1875: 415; 1876: 358; Lewis, 1987, fig. 8M. As characterized in key to varieties.
In cerrado, caatinga and tabuleiro, sometimes locally abundant on valley bottoms, primarily on sandstone, ±300-750 m, scattered over both slopes of the S. Francisco valley in lat. 9°-14°30'S, from extreme w. Pernambuco upstream to s.- centr. Bahia, n.-w. to basin of rio Caninde in centr. Piaui; apparently disjunct or perhaps cultivated in s.-e. Goias (Luizania), whence brought into Distrito Federal, and formerly in Guanabara 60 MIMOSA ACUTISTIPULA var. ACUTISTIPULA var. FERREA • MIMOSA DALYI 9 MIMOSA INSIGNIS 0 MAP 9.
Tropical South America.
Ranges of M. acutistipula Bentham, M. dalyi Bameby, and M. insignis (Hassler) Bameby. (=M. malacocentra var. angustifolia).—¥1. (XI-) XII-III. Map 9.
63b. Mimoa acutistipula (Martius) Bentham var. ferrea Bameby, var. nov., a var. acutistipula foliomm majorum pinnis magis numerosis 7- 11 (nec 4-7)-jugis et florum spicis majoribus pedunculo incluso 5-8 (nec 2-4.5) cm usque longis diversa.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso: Vegeta^ao de canga, frequente, Serra Norte, 21.
VIII. 1973 (fr), /.
M. Pires & B. C. Passos 75207.-Holotypus, NY.
As characterized in key to varieties.
In xeromorphic woodland near 300-350 m, on iron-rich bedrock of Sa. dos Carajas in e. Para and Sa.
Norte in n.-e. Mato Grosso, and on unspecified but probably sandstone substrates e. to the Itapicuru and Parnaiba vaUeys in Maranhao, there fading into var. acutistipula. —Fl.
XII-I, fr.
IV-Vlll.—Jureminha.
Map 9.
64.
Mimosa dichroa Bameby, nom. nov. M. discolor Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 391.
1842, hom. illeg.—"Goyaz, Gardner.^', the locality particularized in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 356.
1876: ".
.
. in collibus siccis ad Arrayas [Goias, 13°S, 47°W. .
.]."-Holotypus, Gardner 3707, collected IV. 1845 (fl), K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1857; isotypi, BM! K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 11656, W!—Non M. discolor Andrews, Bot. Repos.
4: t. 235.
1802; nec Poiret, 1810.
M. discolor sensu Bentham, 1875: 413.
Unarmed, amply microphyllidious arborescent shrubs flowering when 2-4 m tall, the hornotinous stems and foliage except for facially glabrous lfts finely pubemlent with fine gray hairs to 0.1-0.25 mm mixed with minute livid or reddish granules, the firm plane, sometimes minutely ciliolate lfts bicolored, when dry brownish-olivaceous above, paler brown or subglaucescent beneath, the inflorescence a simple pseudoraceme or few-branched panicle of flspikes exserted 2-5 dm beyond expanded lvs.
Stipules erect firm linear-attenuate involute 2-5 X 0.5-0.9 mm, subpersistent.
Leaf-stalks 6-16 cm, the petiole including livid wrinkled pulvinus (1.3-)2-3 cm, near middle 0.9-1.6 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 11-19 mm, the ventral groove intermpted between pinna-pairs by an arched bridge sometimes produced as an incipient spicule; pinnae 5-10-jug., only a little decrescent proximally, the axis of longer ones 6- 9.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-3 (-3.5) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20-32-jug., little graduated, the first 1-1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia, all in outline Unear-oblong obtuse, the longer ones 7-11.5 x 2-2.7 mm, the subcentric costa weakly prominulous beneath, other venules immersed.
Flower-spikes 2-5 per node, the axis including short peduncle 2.5-6 cm; bracts linear-lanceolate 0.7-1.7 mm, caducous; fl-buds plumply obovoid, at least thinly graypilosulous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, many staminate; calyx campanulate, extemally puberulent 0.7-1 mm, the deltate lobes 0.2-0.3 mm; corolla pink turbinate 2-2.5 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.8-1.1 x 0.7-0.8 mm; filaments either pink or in age whitish, free to base, the longer ones exserted 4-7 mm; ovary gray-pilosulous; pod unknown.
In cerrado or cerradao at ±550-700 m, locally endemic to the Brazilian Planalto, known only from e Parana-S. Francisco watershed between 12° and 14°30'S in centr. and e.-centr. Goias (Arraias; Monte Alegre de Goias; Urua9u) and adj. Bahia (mun. Barreiras).—Fl.
X-V. Until the pod is discovered, the status of M. dichroa in relation to M. acutistipula will remain uncertain.
The coarser foliage, the thick-textured, faintly and simply costate leaflets, the longexserted panicle, the usually pink filaments, and the pilosulous ovary and puberulent corollas provide for the present a seemingly strong differential syndrome, but each individual difference is of small weight in itself, and will require reevaluation when the pod is known.
Mimosa dichroa also resembles M. interrupta in leaf-formula, but differs in lack of prickles, no resinous exudate, and extemally pilosulous flowers with more deeply campanulate calyx.
Here again the fmit may eventually provide stronger contrasts.
Mimosa apodocarpa and M. xavantina, also similar in gross facies, have leaflets gland-sprinkled beneath and white filaments.
65.
Mimosa ophthalmocentra Martius ex Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 415.
1875.—"Brazil, prov. Bahia."
, the locality particularized in Martius, ¥1. bras 15(2): 359.
1876. "
.
.
. in silvis Catingas ad Villa Nova da Rainha provinciae Bahiensis et in pascuis provinciae Piauhiensis: Martius; in provincia Bahiensi: Blanchet n. 3684."—Lectotypus, Martius 414 (fl, fr jun) from Vila Nova da Rainha [=Jacobina], IV. 1819, M (2 sheets)!,
one = NY Neg. 11511; probable isotypus, Martius 538, labelled "Piauhy in pascuis," M! = F Neg. 6192; syntypi, Martius 536, 537 from Piaui, M! = M. acutistipula; syntypus, Blanchet 3684, G! Trees attaining 4-6 or reportedly 12 m with several trunks to 1-2 dm diam., the livid branches either unarmed or erratically armed with broad-based horizontal or gently curved infrastipular aculei 1-12 mm, the hornotinous branchlets and axes of lvs and inflorescence glandular-pubemlent with fine erect simple hairs and at least a few gland-tipped ones not over 0.2 mm, the olivaceous subconcolorous lfts facially glabrous eglandular, usually minutely ciliolate, the fl-spikes either all axillary to expanded lvs or some distal ones forming a small panicle or pseudoraceme exserted up to 1 dm from foliage.
Stipules firm, narrowly lanceolate ± involute (2.5-)3- 8 X 0.4-0.9 mm, bluntly carinate dorsally, puberulent on both faces, tardily deciduous.
Leafstalks 1.5-4.5(-6) cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 2-6(-9) x 0.5-0-1.2 mm, the longer interpinnal segments (2.5-)3-10 mm, the ventral groove intermpted between all but the first pair of pinnae by a bridge and small spicule; pinnae 2-6-, commonly 2-4-jug., accrescent distally, the axis of longer ones (1-) 1.3-4 cm, the longer interfoUolar segments 0.6-1.8(-2) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (14-)15-21(-24)-jug., decrescent proximally but elsewhere subequUong, the blades in outline oblong or Unear-oblong obtuse or acute, straight or gently curved forward, the longer ones 4-7 X 1.2-2 mm, 3-6 times as long as wide, aU delicately 2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule dorsally, the displaced midrib dividing the blade 1:2-3.5 and giving rise on posterior side to 2-3 weak secondary venules, the venation sometimes visible above but fully immersed.
Axes of flowerspikes including short peduncle (2-)3-7 cm; bracts linear-oblanceolate or -attenuate 0.7-1.3 x 0.15- 0.25 mm; fl-buds oblong-obovoid 4-angulate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx 0.65-0.9 mm, either puberulent extemally or merely ciliolate, the widely deltate teeth 0.1-0.25 mm; corolla white or pink-tinged, narrowly campanulate 1.5-2.6 mm, glabrous or at times papillate at tip of erect, apically incurved lobes, these 0.5-0.9 x 0.5-0.8 mm, carinate by the prominent midrib; filaments white or creamywhite, free, the longer ones exserted 4-4.5 mm; ovary glabrous.
Pcx^ sessile, (Lewis, 1987, fig. 8L) broadly linear planocompressed, when well fertilized (35-)40-70(-76) x 7-8.5 mm, the almost straight replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, sometimes microscopically puberulent, the papery lustrous valves ±0.1 mm thick in section, at first greenish or reddish, when ripe stramineous or livid, remotely minutely granular, scarcely elevated over seeds, finally breaking up into 7-10(-l 1) oblong or almost square segments (3-)4-7 mm long; seeds (little known) strongly compressed, in profile rhombic-elliptic ±4.5-5 x 3-4 mm, the fuscousolivaceous testa moderately lustrous, the areole ± half as long as seed-face.
In caatinga woodland, sometimes in low places wet or inundated in the rainy season, surviving disturbance and sometimes forming roadside thickets, mostly between 300 and 600 m, interruptedly widespread and locally abundant in e. Brazil, from interior s. Rio Grande do Norte (near 6°30'S), s. to the Contas valley in Bahia (near 14°30'S) and ascending the S. Francisco valley to rio Cocos (near 13°S); planted in Distrito Federal.—Fl.
I-VI(-VIII), the fls sometimes coeval with pods of preceding season.
Map 10.
Mimosa ophthalmocentra and M. acutistipula are sympatric over much of the former's range, both are white-flowered and eglandular, and in consequence they have been much, but needlessly, confused in herbaria.
At anthesis the tetragonal, narrowly campanulate corolla with erect, apically hooded and dorsally keeled lobes, and, later on, the sessile pod infaUibly distinguish M. ophthalmocentra.
While M. ophthalmocentra tends to have fewer pairs of pinnae and fewer leaflets per pinna, the leaf-formulae overlap and do not provide reliable criteria.
Typification of M. ophthalmocentra proved unexpectedly difficult.
Five Martius specimens. variably labeUed and numbered, are preserved at Munich, all annotated as M. ophthalmocentra in Bentham's hand.
These appear to represent three collections at least, and two species, of which my analysis seems worth recording: No. 414, labelled "Vila nova da Rainha," herein proposed as lectotype, is unarmed, has good flowers, and a young pod.
No. 538 = F Neg. 6192, is so similar to the last that I suspect it to be an isotype, but it is labelled "Piauhy in pascuis."
No. 564, armed and sterile, labelled simply "Bahia," is of ambiguous identity but very likely M. acutistipula.
Nos.
536 and 537, both from Piaui, armed and flowering but without pods, have the short leaves of Af. ophthalmocentra but the broadly turbinate flowers without prominent ribs that are the trademark of M. acutistipula.
66.
Mimosa mensicola Bameby, Brittonia 37: 133, fig. 4.
1985.-"BrazU.
Bahia: Sa. do Tombador, ±5 km s. of town of Morro do Chapeu, near base of the morro itself at ± 1100 m, 19 Feb 1971 (fl), Irwin (with Harley & G. L. Smith) 52552."-Holotypus, UB!; isotypi, G! K! LE! NY! P! R! S! US! Fig.
4.
Slender few-branched, short-leaved, macrophyllidious arborescent shrubs 2-5 m with tmnk attaining 6(-?) cm diam., armed on infrastipular ribs of most intemodes and on dorsal rib of some pinna-rachises with broad-based pungent aculei l-4(-6) mm, the cauline aculei straight horizontal and the foliar ones recurved, the sulcate, rather distantly leaved homotinous branches, lf-stks, Ift-margins and axes of inflorescence minutely pubemlent and granular, the branchlets passing upward into a leafless pseudoraceme of relatively short fl-spikes, the firmly chartaceous olivaceous lfts concolorous or slightly paler beneath.
Stipules erect lanceolate 4-7 x 0.6-1.4 mm, the firm blade obscurely 1-nerved, subpersistent.
Leafstalks 3-16 mm, the stout, openly sulcate petiole 3-7 mm, at middle 1.2-1.7 mm diam., the one interpinnal segment (if present) as long or a Uttle longer, the pulvinus (and succeeding pulvinules) cupped in a shallow socket; a stout pubemlent spicule between each pair of pinnae; pinnae 1- 2-jug., the distal one a little longer, the rachises 2-3.5 cm, their interfoliolar segments 3-7.5 mm; lfts 5-7-jug., a little shorter toward each end of MAP 10.
Eastem and planaltine Brazil and Paraguay.
Ranges of M apodocarpa Bentham, M. glutinosa Malme, M. ophthalmocentra Martius, and M. xavantina Bameby. rachis but commonly broader upward, the first pair 2-5 mm beyond the short ovate paraphyllidia, the blades oblong or (distally) obovate-elliptic obtuse, the longer ones 15-24 x 5-13 mm, all 4-7-nerved from pulvinule, the 1-2 stronger posterior ones and the secondary ones arising from near and above middle of costa all brochidodrome just short of the margin, the venulation bluntly prominulous on both faces but more emphatically elevated beneath.
Flowerspikes 1-4 per node, the axis including short peduncle 2.5-7 cm; bracts 0.4-0.7 mm, caducous before anthesis; fl-buds obovoid, glabrous beyond pubemlent calyx; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, apparently all bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.8-1 mm, the low-deltate teeth 0.1-0.2 mm; corollas white, pinkish in age, at full anthesis shortly funnelform 2.6-3 mm, the ovate acute, apically callous lobes 1.2-1.8 x 1 mm; filaments white, free to base, the longer ones exserted 3.2- 4.5 mm; ovary glabrous.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 8D) sessile, broad-linear planocompressed, when 2mm. jVIirrKTsau FIG. 4.
Mimosa mensicola Bameby.
A. Flowering branch.
B. Leaflets, ventral view, margin enlarged.
C. Portion of stem showing stipules and base of leaf-stalk.
D. Pod.
E. Rower. (A-C from Irwin 32552, D from Harley 22997, E from Harley 22996.) weU fertilized 5-7 x 0.8-1 cm, 8-10-seeded, the smooth or remotely aculeolate replum ±0.6 mm wide, the glossy red-purple, when dry brunnescent valves delicately venulose and dotted with minute sessile glands, low-colliculate over each seed, at length separating from replum and breaking into dehiscent articles 6-9 mm long. In scrub-thickets on sandstone and in cerrado at woodland margins, 1000-1150 m, known only from the vicinity of Morro do Chapeu, near 1 r30'S in interior upland Bahia, BrazU.—Fl.
IIVin, fr.
VI-IX. Mimosa mensicola appears to be a specialized local derivative of the widespread M. ophthalmocentra.
The flowers and pods of these two species are quite similar, but the foliage of M. mensicola is greatly modified by reduction of leaf-formula and reciprocal amplification of the leaflets.
67.
Mimosa dalyi Bameby, Brittonia 36: 249, fig. 1.
1984.-"Bolivia.
Santa Cmz, prov. Chiquitos: Santa Isabel, 20-25 km SSE of Santiago de Chiquitos, 22 Jul 1983 (fl, fr jun), D. C. Daly et al. 2269. —Holotypus, NY!; isotypi, G! K! LPB! US! Unarmed microphyllidious arborescent shrubs or treelets 1-3 m, the livid annotinous branchlets and all If-axes densely minutely pubemlent with erect hairs not over 0.1 mm, the plane thin-textured concolorous lfts glabrous facially, ciliolate, the terminal, leafless or proximally leafy-bracteate pseudoracemes of narrow amentiform flspikes puberulent throughout and minutely mfous-lepidote but eglandular.
Stipules (caducous, few seen) linear-setiform 2-3(-?) mm.
Leaf-stalks 10-15 cm, the petiole including obese pulvinus (5-)7-10 X 1.2-1.7 mm, the interpinnal segments 4-6.5 mm, the ventral groove constricted at insertion of pinnae but spicules 0; pinnae 18- 31-jug., a little decrescent near each end of Ifstk, the rachis of longer ones 3.5-4.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.6 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 42-64-jug., subequilong except at each end of rachis, the small first pair 0.2-0.5 mm distant from minute paraphyllidia, the blades linear-elliptic from postically acutangulate base, obtuse or subacute, those near mid-rachis 2.5-4 X 0.7-0.9 mm, 3.6-5 times as long as wide, aU veinless above, beneath 3-nerved from pulvinule, the costa centric, the anterior and posterior ones narrowly intramarginal, produced nearly to blade apex.
Primary axis of inflorescence ± 1-2 dm, the fl-spikes mostly 2-3 per node, their axis including short peduncle 6-11 cm; bracts lanceovate 0.4-0.8 mm, caducous; y7c>w^r5 4-merous 8-androus, all or almost all bisexual, extemally thinly puberulent and mfous-lepidote (scales ± 0.1 mm); calyx shallowly campanulate or subrotate ±0.5 X 1 mm, cleft half-way into lowdeltate lobes; corollas pink, turbinate-campanulate 2.1-2.3 mm, the membranous ovate acute 1 -nerved lobes ± 1 mm; filaments free almost to base, pink, exserted 5-5.5 mm; ovary villosulous; style ± as long as filaments.
Pods linear submoniliform, a trifle compressed laterally, attenuate at both ends, 45-80 x 3 mm, the shallowly undulate-constricted replum ±1.5 mm wide, the firm subcoriaceous tuberculate glabrate valves tardily breaking up into 8-10 narrowly ellipsoid articles 6-9 mm long, these rather reluctantly separating from the broad persistent replum; seeds vertically basipetal, plumply oblong-ellipsoid 4.5-5 X 2 mm, the smooth testa dull brown.
In dry forest, 200-400 m, locally common but known only from the Guapore-Paraguai watershed in e. Bolivia, in lat. ± 16°-l 8°30'S (Velasco; Santiago de Chiquitos).-R. VI-VII. Map 9.
Mimosa dalyi resembles M. insignis in symmetrically 3-nerved leaflets and plump submoniliform pod with broad replum, but differs greatly in leaf-formula, mfous-lepidote flowers and pink filaments.
The form and basipetal orientation of the seeds are effects of constraint from the pod walls.
68.
Mimosa insignis (Hassler) Bameby, Brittonia 36:249, fig. 1 [right].
19^A.
Schranckiastrum insigne Yiassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 16: 152.
1919.—"Paraguaria septentrionalis: In silvis montanis aridis prope Rio perdido, flor. et fmct. mens. April.
1913, [Hassler] no. i7052."-Holotypus, G!; isotypi.
A! +B = F Neg. 1291, BM! F! K! NY! W! Schranckiastrum insigne sensu Bernardi, Boissiera 35: 200, fig. 51.
1984.
Unarmed, amply leafy microphyllidious tall shrubs and treelets attaining ±4 m, with smooth livid branchlets, appearing glabrous up to the pubemlent amentiform fl-spikes but the lf-stks minutely pubemlent and the olivaceous concolorous lfts minutely ciliolate, nowhere glandular but the very young shoots subresinous, the inflorescence a small panicle of spikes solitary or 2-3 together in axil of coeval lvs, the long narrow pods immersed in foliage.
Stipules erect, narrowly lanceolate 2-5 x 0.4-0.6 mm, dorsally 1-nerved, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 6-12 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 15-24 mm, the interpinnal segments 6-20 mm, the narrow ventral sulcus bridged between pinnae and charged with a weak, minutely pubemlent spicule 0.5- 1.2 mm; pinnae 5-10-jug., subequilong or erratically graduated, the rachis of longer ones 5-9 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.3 mm, their ventral ridge wider distally, the whole rachis, shorn of lfts, appearing serrate in profile; lfts of longer pinnae ±40-70-jug., subequilong except at very base of rachis, the first pair 0.4-1 mm distant from minute ascending paraphyllidia, the blades linear-lanceolate from obliquely obtusangulate base, those near mid-rachis 6-9.5(-10) x 0.8-1.1 mm, 7.5-10 times as long as wide, the ventral face veinless or almost so, the dorsal one pallidly 3-nerved, the midrib centric, the primary nerve on either side submarginal and produced to blade apex.
Axis of flower-spikes icluding short peduncle (4-)4.5-9.5 cm; bracts membranous oblanceolate incurved ± 1 mm, caducous; flowers sessile 4-merous 8-androus, puberulent overall; calyx membranous shallowcampanulate ± 1 mm, the low-deltate teeth 0.4- 0.5 mm; corollas whitish turbinate 2.2-2.5 mm, the ovate, faintly 1-nerved, shallowly concave lobes ±1.3 X 1 mm; filaments white, monadelphous through ±0.5 mm, exserted 4-5 mm; ovary puberulent but glabrate soon after fertilization; ovules 6-12.
Pod in profile narrowly linear, attenuate at both ends, 6-16 x ±0.25 cm, gently constricted between seeds and hence submoniliform, obtusely tetragonal and a little laterally compressed, the smooth dilated convex replum 2-2.5 mm wide, the firm, almost plane, reticulately venulose valves ±1.5 mm wide, when ripe separating from replum and breaking into narrowly ellipsoid free-falling dehiscent articles 9- 13 mm long; seeds vertically basipetal, ellipsoid ±7 X 2.5 mm, the testa duU black.
In seasonally dry woodland near 200 m, apparently rare, known only from the e. slope of the upper Paraguai basin in Mato Grosso do Sul (Fda.
Sta. Cruz), Brazil and immediately adj. Paraguay (confluence of rios Apa and Perdido).—Fl.
X, IV, the full season unknown.
Map 9.
Among Leiocarpae this species is strongly characterized by very numerous, crowded, finely but sharply trinerved leaflets and by white flowers giving rise to narrow moniliform, bluntly tetragonal pods with replum as wide as or a little wider than the valves, which break into exceptionaUy long, narrower articles.
The Bolivian M. dalyi is alone like it in pod-structure, but this has more than twice as many pinnae, leaflets more faintly trinerved, minutely rufous-lepidote flowers, and pink filaments.
The curious story of Schranckiastrum, based on misinterpretation of the pod's replum as persistent entire valves and of its valves as a disarticulating replum, has been recounted elsewhere (Bameby, 1984).
69.
Mimosa tenuiflora (Willdenow) Poiret, Encycl.
Suppl. 1: 82.
1810, based on Acacia tenuiflora Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1088.
1806.- '^Habitat ad Caracas, Bredemeyer.^^—\iolotypus, Bredemeyer20 in B-WILLD 19189, seen in microform!—Non M. tenuiflora Bentham, 1846.
Acacia hostilis Martius in Spix & Martius, Reise Bras.
1:555.
1823.—".. . im Algadisso [onrio S. Francisco near 15°S]."—Holotypus, Martius 1856, collected IX. 1818 (fr), M! = FNeg.
6185 = IPA Neg. 1348.- Mimosa hostilis (Martius) Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 415.
1875 & in Martius, ¥\. bras. 15(2): 359.
1876.
M. apodocarpa var. hostilis (Martius) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 1.
1910.
Mimosa cabrera Karsten, Fl.
Columb.
2: 63, t. 132.
1863. —"Habitat planities calidas siccas septentrionales Columbiae....""—Holotypus, Karsten s.n. from "Coro, Sta. Marta," W! M. nigra J. Huber, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 1: 303.
1901.—"[Brazil, Ceara:] Depressions humides dans le Sertao, pres Quixada (309)."—Holotypus, collected in Oct 1897, labeled 'M acutifolia var. nigra', MG! M. limana Rizzini, Leandra 4-5: 14, est. 12.
1974.— "Vivit in caatinga ad Senhor de Bomfim, Bahia, coll. D. P. Lima 13.147. (16-V-73).
Holotypus in RB no. 148.275."-Holotypus, RB! M. maracasensis Harms in herb.,
nom. ined.—Maracas, Bahia, IX. 1906, Ule 8956, G! HAMB! K! M. cabrera sensu Bentham, 1876: 416.
M. tenuiflora sensu Lewis, 1987, fig. 8E (pod).
Often vulnerantly prickly, microphyllidious arborescent shrubs and trees commonly 2-5 m with stiff" knotty fuscous, livid or blackish branches erratically armed with stout subhorizontal castaneous or livid aculei 2-10 mm arising from a broad swoUen pediment, the sometimes unarmed homotinous branchlets and foliage pubemlent and ± resinous or viscid with minute soft hairs 0.1-0.3 mm and mostly sessile or semiimmersed, but on some stems partly short-stipitate glands ±0.05-0.1 mm diam., the plane firm lfts subconcolorous, dull olivaceous often brunnescent when dry, facially either glabrous or finely puberulent, dorsally sprinkled with semiimmersed glands, often minutely ciliolate, the fl-spikes from axils of fully expanded or already fallen lvs, the inflorescence in consequence either immersed in foliage or on defoliate annotinous branchlets.
Stipules deltate, triangular or triangular-acuminate (0.5-) 1-2.5 mm, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks (2-)2.5-6.5(-9.5) cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 7-14 mm, at middle 0.5- 0.9 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments (3-)4-9(-l 1) mm, the ventral groove intermpted between pinnae by a spicule 0.3-1 mm; pinnae in Brazil 4-7-, n.-ward to 11-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones (2-)2.5-5 (-5.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-2.2 (-2.5) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (15-) 17-33 (-40)-jug., decrescent only near ends of rachis, in outline Unear-oblong obtuse or sometimes minutely apiculate, the longer ones (3.5-)4-8 x 1- 1.6 mm, 2.5-5 times as long as wide, faintly 1 (-2)- nerved dorsally, the upper face veinless.
Spikes solitary or sometimes geminate, subsessile, in young bud appearing as dense cylindric aments ±5-10 X 2-3 mm, the axis becoming 4-10 cm, loosely spicate; bracts cuneate-spatulate 0.6- 1 mm, at dilated apex hooded and dorsally puberulent; fl-buds oblong-obovoid, minutely glandular-papiUate distally; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some often staminate; calyx turbinatecampanulate 0.75-1 mm, 4-angulate by prominent ribs leading to the very short, cucuUately incurved, dorsally pubemlent lobes; corolla turbinate 2.1-3.1 mm, whitish or greenish-white, the ovate, apically callous and incurved lobes 0.7-1.6 mm; filaments white, free, the longer ones exserted 3 ^ mm; ovary gray-pilosulous laterally and glandular-vermculose overaU.
Pods narrowly oblong or oblong-eUiptic in profile, when weU fertilized 25-50 x 6-8.5 mm, 4-6-seeded, the body cuneately contracted at base into a slender stipe 2-4 mm, the shaUowly undulate replum 0.3-0.5 mm wide, the thin green valves becoming stramineous or brownish, buUately elevated over each seed, viscid with both sessile and shortstipitate glands, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into articles ± 6-8 mm long; seeds in broad profile obovate-subcordate ± 4 - 4.5 X 3.3 mm, the testa dull brown.
An element of brush-woodland communities subject to periodic or seasonal drought, in Brazil mostly in caatinga but entering cerrado and occasional on sandstone outcrops, in places forming weedy thickets in pastures and along highways, in n. South America in semideciduous forest and chaparral, mostly below 500 m but in Bahia attaining 750(-900) m, discontinuously dispersed in tropical North and South America: n.-e. Brazil in lat. 4-15°S, locally abundant from Ceara and Rio Grande do Norte to s.-e. Piaui and interior Bahia, there reaching the Contas valley e. of the central highlands and in the S. Francisco basin extending to Espigao Mestre and the frontier of Minas Gerais, perhaps disjunct (pending confirmation) in far e. S. Paulo (Campos da Bocaina, leg. Glaziou, P!), interior Venezuela (Zulia, Cojedes, Guarico, Lara, Aragua) and the Guajira Peninsula in n.-e. Colombia; arid valleys of the Pacific slope in El Salvador and Honduras; Pacific lowlands of Oaxaca and Chiapas, Mexico. —Fl. in Brazil irregularly throughout the year, in Venezuela mostly X-ll(-V). — Carbonal, cabrera, cuji cabrera (Venezuela-Colombia); jurema, j . preta (Brazil); tepescohuite (Mexico).
Map 5.
A syndrome of viscid foliage, strongly 4-ribbed calyx with incurved lobes, and a stipitate thinwalled pod charged with mixed sessile and stipitate glands, the valves buUately distended over the seeds, neatly defines this widespread species.
The Brazilian populations, which were ascribed by Bentham to an endemic species, M. hostilis, differ only very slightly from those of Venezuela by leaves on the average a little shorter and composed of fewer (mostly 4-7, not 6-11) pairs of pinnae; but some individual plants from these widely disjunct areas are nevertheless identical in foliage.
Stipitate glands are perhaps more frequent north than south of the Equator, but are imperfectly correlated with dispersal.
In recent years tepescohuite has received sensational publicity as a miracle drug in the treatment of bums.
It is said to be harvested in Chiapas in great quantities.
70.
Mimosa apodocarpa Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 415.
1875.-"Brazil, prov. Goyaz."
, the locality given more fully in Martius, n . bras. 15(2): 359.
1876: ".
.
. inter FunU et Sao Joao [on rio Tocantins near 10°S], provinciae Goyaz: Burchell, n. 9003."—Holotypus, K (hb. Hook)! = NY Neg. 11662; isotypi, GH! NY! P! M. apodocarpa var. genuina Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 1.
1910.
Amply microphyllidious arborescent shrubs (2-)3-6 m with trunk attaining 12 cm diam., unarmed or thinly armed with erratic infrastipular aculei 1-2 mm, except for glabrous face of lfts pUosulous throughout with erect whitish hairs 0.3-0.5 mm mixed with small sessile golden or colorless glands, the foliage moderately bicolored, when dry brown-olivaceous above, a little paler beneath, the firm plane ciliolate Ifts dotted beneath with pale yellow lentiform or immersed glands 0.05-0.1 mm diam., the inflorescence a leafless pseudoraceme or few-branched panicle exserted 1.5-5 dm from foliage.
Stipules erect lance-subulate 2-4 x 0.4-0.9 mm, bluntly 1-nerved dorsally, early dry deciduous.
Leafstalks of major lvs 6-11 cm, the petiole including wrinkled pulvinus 7-12 mm, at middle 0.8-1.5 mm diam., its longer interpinnal segments 3-6 mm, the ventral groove interrupted between pinna-pairs by a pilosulous bridge sometimes surmounted by a minute pubemlent spicule; pinnae of major lvs 11-20-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 3-4.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 30-40-jug., the first pair 0.3-0.5 mm beyond the erect subulate paraphyllidia, all in outline linear-oblong obtuse-apiculate, straight or a little arched forward, the longer ones 3-5 x 0.7-l(-l .2) mm, the blades obscurely keeled dorsally by the subcentric midrib, otherwise externally veinless.
Flower-spikes 1-3 per node, their axis including very short or obsolete peduncle (3_)4_10 cm; bracts oblanceolate 0.6-1.2 mm, caducous; fl-buds plumply ovoid hispidulous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.7-1.1 mm, hispidulous extemally and ciliolate; coroUas white 1.9-2.1 mm, the ovate 1-nerved, dorsaUy pUosulous lobes 1.2- 1.4 X 0.7-0.8 mm; filaments white, free, exserted 4-4.5 mm; ovary pilosulous and encrusted with small golden glands.
Pods sessile, broadly linear planocompressed 50-65 x 10-12 mm, the replum 0.5-0.7 mm wide, the chartaceous brown valves ±0.1 mm thick in section, thinly pilosulous overall and charged with scattered sessile glands, when ripe breaking into 8-10 segments 6.5-8 mm long; seed (of type) plumply discoid 6 x 5 mm, the testa dull brown.
In habitats little recorded, known in modem times from cerrado and disturbed gallery woodland at 800 m, but the type collected probably in lowlands near 300 m, either local or overlooked, known only from upper Tocantins valley between 10° and 14°15'S in n. and e.-centr. Goias, Brazil (Cachoeira Funil; Posse and vicinity).— H. III-IV(-?).
Map 10.
A handsome mimosa, M. apodocarpa has exceptionally ample paniculate pseudoracemes of white flowers, all reaching anthesis simultaneously.
It is apparently closely akin to M. xavantinae but distinguished by relatively compact, microphyllidious leaves and campanulate, not crateriform calices.
71.
Mimosa xavantinae Bameby, sp. nov., M. apodocarpae quoad foliola dorso glandulis flavis conspersa, paniculam aphyllam exsertam, flores albas leguminisque formam similem affinis, sed ab ea foliolis subduplo majoribus, majoribus 5.5-10 x 1.8-2.4 (nec 3-4.5 X 0.75-1) mm secus rachin elongatam 4.5-10 (nec 3 ^ ) cm longam dissitius dispositis, necnon calyce crateriformi coroUae 4-5-pio (nec campanulato subdimidio) breviori diversa.— Brazil.
Mato Grosso do Norte: Sa. do Roncador, ±60 km n. of Xavantina, 550 m, 6.
VI. 1966 (fr), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 76677.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, R. M. apodocarpa sensu Malme, 1931: 52; non Bentham.
Shrubs and treelets 2-3.5 m, often erratically armed on ribs descending from stipules and sometimes elsewhere with few distant broadbased, erect or recurved aculei (0.5-)l-4 mm (but some branches unarmed), the smooth brown stems, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence all, or at least the lf-stks, pilosulous with fine spreadingincurved gray hairs to 0.2-0.55 mm commonly mixed with random sessile glands, the firm bicolored lfts commonly glabrous but rarely thinly puberulent facially, ciliolate, beneath charged with hemispherical or lentiform golden glands to 0.1-0.2 mm diam., the inflorescence a leafless panicle of spikes exserted 3-6 dm from expanded foliage.
Stipules erect linear-lanceolate 2-4.5 x 0.3-0.7 mm, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 8-17 cm, the petiole including wrinkled pulvinus 14- 27 X 0.3-0.7 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 6-15 mm, the ventral groove intermpted between each pair of pinnae by a stiff" tapered spicule 0.6-1.5 mm; pinnae 8-16-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 4.5-10 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5- 4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 23-35-jug., the first pair close beyond the subulate paraphyllidia, all in outline linear-oblong obtuse apiculate, straight or a Uttle arched forward, the longer ones (5.5-)6- 10 X 1.8-2.4 mm, the blades brownish lustrous above, beneath paler and bluntly keeled by the slightly displaced costa, otherwise extemally veinless.
Axis of flower-spikes 3-9(-15) cm, the fls at anthesis moderately crowded; bracts elliptic-oblanceolate less than 1 mm, caducous; flbuds plumply ovoid; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some staminate ones a trifle smaller than the rest; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate-crateriform ±0.4 x 1 mm, the angulate rim scarcely lobed, ciliolate; corolla white 1.8-2 mm, the ovate acute 1-nerved lobes ±1.2 x 0.8-1 mm, dorsally thinly pilosulous and golden-glandular; ovary densely pilosulous and glandular.
Pods sessile, in profile broadly linear, gently arched downward, planocompressed 6-13 x 0.9- 1.3 cm, the replum 0.7-1 mm wide, the stiflfly papery lustrous brown or brownish-olivaceous, delicately venulose valves ±0.1 mm thick in section, dotted overall with minute sessile reddishlivid and often some slightly larger golden glands, sometimes also residually pilosulous, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into 9- 15 articles 7-10(-ll) mm long; seeds compressed-ovoid or-suborbicular ±4.6-5.3 X 3.7- 4.8 mm, the brown or olivaceous testa smooth but duU.
In cerrado, 400-600 m, apparently local on headwaters of rios Araguaia and dos Mortes in e. Mato Grosso do Norte, s. to the s. slope of Sa. do Caiap6 in s.-w. Goias, and s.-w. to upper rio Cuiaba in s.-centr. Mato Grosso do Norte and to Sa. de Maracaju in centr. Mato Grosso do Sul.—Fl.
XII-IV, the fmit long persistent on withered stems.
Map 10.
Mimosa xavantinae was coUected first by Malme near Cuiaba in 1903 (nos.
3159, 3159a, S!) and referred with reservations to M. apodocarpa, manifestly its closest known relative.
It has the pod of M. apodocarpa, but the larger leaflets coinciding with a shallow dish-shaped calyx appear to distinguish it satisfactorily.
The differential characters of the also closely related M. interrupta have been brought out in the key to ser. Leiocarpae.
72.
Mimosa interrupta Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 392.
1841.-"BrazU, Pohl.'\ the locality particularized in Martius, ¥1. bras. 15(2): 358, t. 88 (incorrectly depicting a glabrous ovary).
1876: "in Brasilia interiore ad 'Buriti pigmeno Guarda Mor' [=Buriti Grande-Guarda Mor, near 16°S, 15°W in s.-centr. Goias]."-Holotypus, Pohl d.2458 = 1437, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1859; isotypi, F! = F neg.
54888, K (hb. Hook.)! NY! W! M. interrupta sensu Bentham, 1876: 415; Malme, 1931: 51, fig. a. Amply leafy arborescent shrubs and trees, ffowering when 1.5-2 m but attaining 4 m with tmnk to 7(-?) cm diam., armed at most nodes by a pair of stout broad-based infrastipular aculei 1.5-4.5 mm, the fuscous-livid hornotinous branchlets, lf-stks and axes of infforescence weakly pilosulous with erect whitish hairs to 0.15- 0.4 mm, the foliage ± resinous, the bicolored, glabrous or microscopically ciliolate firm-textured lfts brownish lustrous above, paler and minutely punctulate beneath, the extended pseudoraceme of loose ff-spikes exserted at anthesis 1-3 dm above foliage but hysteranthously leafy, the long-persistent pods immersed in lvs.
Stipules firm triangular-subulate or lanceolate 1.2- 2.5 mm, obscurely 1-nerved, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 5-11 cm, the petiole including firm livid pulvinus 8-16 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 6-15 mm, the ventral groove intermpted between all pairs of pinnae by a stout pubemlent spicule 0.7-1.5 mm; pinnae (5-)6- 10(-13) pairs, a little decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 5-6 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-3.3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 17-26(-31)-jug., the first pair 1-1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyUidia, the blades linearoblong or oblong-eUiptic obtuse but bluntly apiculate, the longer ones including the obtuse basal MIMOSA HEBECARPA • MIMOSA INTERRUPTA# MIMOSA SERICANTHA 0 Its (lu.
!•• m MAP 11.
Planaltine Brazil.
Ranges of M. hebecarpa Bentham, M. interrupta Bentham, and M. sericantha Bentham. auricle (6-)6.5-9.5 x (1.1-) 1.3-3 mm, aU when narrow 1-, when broader 2-nerved dorsally from pulvinule, the venation faintly impressed above, an obscure tertiar>' venulation sometimes visible dorsally.
Axis of flower-spikes 7-14 cm; bracts minute caducous; fl-buds plumply ovoid glabrous resinous;yZow^r5 4-merous 8-androus, some functionally staminate; calyx crateriform or shallowly campanulate 0.3-0.4 mm, the rim minutely denticulate; corolla white, broadly turbinate 2-2.8 mm, the ovate 1-nerved, apically callous lobes 1.6-2 x 0,7-1.2 mm, extemally minutely glandular-papillate and usually resinously lustrous; filaments white, free, the longer ones exserted 5-7 mm; ovary white-pilosulous, the hairs early deciduous.
Pods ascending, sessile or cuneately contracted at base into a stout stipe to 2 mm, the body in profile broad-linear planocompressed, when well fertilized 55-100 x 8- 12 mm, 7-10-seeded, the replum 1.2-1.7 mm wide, the stiff" valves composed of livid exocarp ±0.1 mm and cmstaceous endocarp 0.1-0.15 mm thick in cross-section, when ripe separating from replum and tardily breaking up into articles 1- 10 mm long, these resinous becoming furfuraceous extemally, light brown within; seeds (few seen) ±4.5-5 x 4 mm, the pale brown testa smooth lustrous.
In cerrado and at margin of gallery woodland, 400-700 m, apparently local in s. and e. Mato Grosso do Norte, from mun. Cuiaba to Sa. do Roncador, and in s.-w. Goias in foothills of Sas.
Dourada and Caiapo, n. to the middle Tocantins valley near Carolina, Maranhao.—Fl.
XII-III.— Angiquinho.
Map 11.
Among the Leiocarpae with dorsally glandpunctate leaffets M. interrupta is notable for ample foUage, lustrously resinous white ffowers, and firm planocompressed pod at first resinous but in full maturity finely furfuraceous.
73.
Mimosa glutinosa Malme, Ark. Bot. 23A(13): 51, fig. 8c. 1931.-"[BrazU.
Mato Grosso do Sul:] Porto Murtinho [2.1.1903, Malme] (II: 2785, fforens) [25.
VII.1903] (II:2785a, fmctibus maturis omata)."—Lectotypus, Malme 2785a, S!; syntypi, Malme 2785, F! S! M. millefoliata var. glaberrima Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 554 (=P1. hassler.
410).
1904.- "... in campis siccis regionis superioris fluminis Apa, Dec. [Hassler] n. 8299."-Holotypus, G!; isotypi, C! F! G! GH! K! NY! P! S! US! W ! - M apodocarpa var. intermedia Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 1.
1910, nom. illegit. (includes typus of preceding).
M. macrostachya var. glaberrima (Chodat & Hassler) Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 13.
1919.
M. apodocarpa sensu Bernardi, Boissiera 35: 145.
1984; non Bentham.
Shrubs becoming broad-crowned trees attaining 6 m, unarmed or erratically aculeolate, with blackish old bark but pallid gray or whitish annotinous and homotinous branchlets, except for microscopic puberulence of If-axes glabrous throughout, the concolorous olivaceous lfts minutely densely gland-punctate beneath, the infforescence a panicle of loose spikes at anthesis to 1-2 dm from foliage, perhaps hysteranthously foliate, the white ffs resinous.
Stipules subulate 1-2.2 mm, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks of well-developed lvs 7-12 cm, the petiole (7-) 10-15 x 0.5-0.8 mm, the ventral groove intermpted between each pair of pinnae by a spicule 0.3-0.8 mm; pinnae 8-15-jug., little and irregularly graduated, the rachis of longer ones 2-3 cm, the interfoUolar segments 0.8-1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 22-34-jug., the first pair 0.4-0.5 mm distant from erect subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.4 mm, the blades narrowly oblong obtuse subapiculate, the longer ones 3-3.7 x 0.8-1.3 mm, aU veinless above, weakly 1 -nerved beneath, the midrib almost centric.
Flower-spikes mostly 2-3 per node, the axis including very short peduncle 3-10 cm; bracts ovate minute, much shorter than the resinous fl-buds, fugacious; flowers white, 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx very shallowly campanulate ±0.3 x 0.5-0.6 mm, obscurely denticulate; coroUas turbinate 2.4-2.8 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 1.3-1.5 x 1 mm; filaments white, free to base, exserted to 6 mm; ovary densely gray-villosulous.
Pods subsessile, in profile broad-linear 5-9 X 0.8-1.5 cm, 8-10-seeded, the replum ± 0.7-1 mm wide, the glabrous brown, resinously lustrous valves becoming suberously coUiculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling indehiscent, rhombic or elliptic articles 7-10 mm long. In campo thickets and occurring as isolated trees in low rich campo, probably not above 400 m, known only from along rio Paraguai and its affluents between 21°30'S and the Tropic of Capricorn in n. Paraguay and adj. Mato Grossado Sul, BrazU.-H. XII-II. Map 10.
This attractive catkin-mimosa was first described as a variety of the distantly related haplostemonouos M. millefoliata, and later reinterpreted by Hassler as a link between M. apodocarpa and M. hostilis (=M. tenuiflora of this account).
The two latter are members of the same section, but both allopatric and specifically distinct, M. apodocarpa differing in deeply campanulate calyx and hispidulous, not resinous corolla and M. tenuiflora in structure of both calyx and corolla and in the thin-textured bullate stipitate-glandular pod.
The species most closely akin to M. glutinosa appears to be M. interrupta, similar in minutely gland-punctate leaffets and glabrous resinous flowers.
From this it is readily distinguished at anthesis by the pallid branchlets and in fmit by the characteristic pod, not planocompressed as that of M. interrupta but suberously thickened and mounded over each seed.
74.
Mimosa hebecarpa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 5: 87.
1846.-"On the Rio Pardo [ in s.-e. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil], Riedel'" Holotypus, Riedel 430, collected VIII. 1826 (fl, fr jun), K (hb. Benth.)!; isotypus, LE! M. hebecarpa sensu Bentham, 1875: 356, erroneously ascribed to Minas Gerais; 1876: 413, erroneously ascribed to Sao Paulo.
Unarmed, stiflfly branched treelets 2-4 m, the annotinous branchlets terete or almost so, the homotinous ones with lf-stks and axis of fl-spikes pilosulous with erect whitish or yellowish hairs intermixed with small reddish or yellow glands, the thin-textured, facially glabrous but ciliolate lfts bicolored, when mature and dried brownish smooth above, beneath dotted with red or partly yellow lentiform glands ±0.05-0.1 mm diam., the fl-spikes solitary or several together from defoliate annotinous nodes or from the very first axils of new growth, in either case much surpassed by coetaneously developing leafy branchlets.
Stipules lance-subulate 1.5-3 mm, caducous.
Leaf-stalks of fully developed lvs 9-19 x 0.8-1.3 mm, the petiole including firm discolored pulvinus 5-12 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-13 mm, the ventral groove continuous between pairs of pinnae; pinnae of major lvs (8-)l l-23(-25)-jug., often not quite opposite, the rachis of middle and distal ones 3.5-6.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (1-) 1.2-2.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 28—42-jug., the first pair close beyond subulate paraphyllidia, all subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the blades oblongobtuse or a little widened toward the obtuse basal auricle, the longer ones (3.5-)4-7 x 1-2.8 mm, all becoming weakly carinate dorsally by the slightly displaced costa and, when broad, by 1 short posterior nerve.
Axis of flower-spikes including the short or obsolete peduncle 6-15 cm, the fls crowded; bracts linear-lanceolate 0.6-1.6 mm, caducous; fl-buds plumply ovoid-ellipsoid, beyond middle thinly pilose and minutely glandular; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, apparently aU bisexual; calyx 0.7-1.2 mm, the deltate ciliolate teeth 0.2-0.4 mm; coroUa pink, in profile turbinate 2-2.6 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes a little thickened at apex 1.1-1.5 x 0.8-1.2 mm; filaments usually pink, rarely pale pink or white, the longer ones exserted 5-8 mm.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) stipitate, the stipe 1.5-3 mm, the body Unear-oblong planocompressed 25-45(-50) x ±7 mm, 5-9-seeded, the replum ±0.3 mm wide, the papery valves and replum alike densely softly pilosulous with erect pallid or yellowish hairs to 0.5-0.8 mm intermixed with minute sessile glands, the valves separating from replum and breaking up into dehiscent segments ± 5-6 mm long; seeds not seen.
In cerrado, (?-)300-600 m, local on both slopes of the Paraguai-Parana divide in Mato Grosso, extreme s.-w. Goias, and Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil, from Chapada dos Guimaraes near Cuiaba s. to rios Pardo and Brilhante near 22°S.— Fl.
VII-XI, as or before new leafy growth commences.
Map 11.
Gland-dotted leaflets and flower-spikes arising mostly from old wood at the end of the dry season characterize this species, which is apparently unarmed and normally pink-flowered.
The densely villous pod, to which the epithet refers, is also distinctive.
Maguire collected pink-flowered (56316, NY) and white-flowered (56321, NY) M. hebecarpa close together along the road west of Alto Araguaia in Mato Grosso, but their relative frequency was not recorded.
75.
Mimosa spixiana Bameby, sp. nov., M. sericanthae ut videtur affinis, sed pube praeter glandulas minimas sessiles nulla et foliolis simul magis numerosis (pinnamm longiomm 10-14-, nec 5-10-jugis) ac dimidio minoribus (7-12.5 X 3-4, nec 16-24 x 9-17 mm usque) manifeste diversa.
A M. interrupta, cui olim typum retulit cl.
Bentham.,
caulibus inermibus glabris (nec pilosulis), stipulis elongatis (4-8, nec 1-2.5 mm longis), pinnis paucis (4-5- nec 6-10-jugis), foliolis minus numerosis (10-14- nec 17-26-jugis usque), coroUisque parcissime glandulosis (nec resinosis) longius distat.— Brazil.
Minas Gerais: "in campis Chapada de Paranan [near 15°S, 46°W], Sept. [1818]," K. F. p. von Martius 1814. —Holotypus, M = NY Neg. 11545.
M. interrupta sensu Bentham, 1876: 358, minore ex parte, quoad pi. martianam cit.
Presumably shrubby or arborescent like related species but stature not recorded, the smooth livid homotinous branchlets and nigrescent foliage glabrous except for minute sessile yellow glands scattered along lf-stks and over dorsal face of relatively ample firm venulose sublustrous concolorous lfts, the amentiform ff-spikes geminate in the axil of coevally expanding lvs, the ffs glabrous gland-sprinkled.
Stipules stiffly erect, narrowly lance-acuminate 4-8 x 0.4-1.3 mm.
1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks stout 4-6 cm, the petiole including pulvinus 3-8 x 1.2-1.5 mm, the interpinnal segments 7-11 mm, the open ventral sulcus bridged between pairs of pinnae and the bridge between lowest pair surmounted by a spicule; pinnae 4-5-jug., distally accrescent, the axis of distal pair 4-5 cm, the interfoUolar segments 3-5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 10-14- jug., subdecrescent proximally but otherwise subequilong, the first pair 1.2-1.5 mm distant from lance-subulate paraphyllidia 0.8-1.4 mm, all in outline obliquely oblong or ovate-oblong from semicordate base, deltately acute at apex, those at and above mid-rachis 7-12.5 x 3-4.3 mm, ±3-3.5 times as long as wide, the blades smooth veinless above, beneath prominently 4-nerved from pulvinule, the stout tapering costa displaced to divide blade ±1:3-3.5, its posterior neighbor nearly as strong and produced well beyond mid-blade, like the costa several-branched, the outer nerves weak and short.
Peduncles ±3 cm; axis of spikes 4-5.5(-?) cm; bracts linearoblanceolate 1.4-1.7 mm, deciduous; flowers sessile, 4-merous 8-androus, the sparsely gland-dotted buds narrowly obovoid; calyx campanulate 1.2 mm, the triangular teeth ±0.35 mm; corolla narrowly turbinate 2.8 mm, the lobes ±1.3 x 0.7 mm, charged extemally with a few golden glands; filaments of unknown color, free to base, exserted ±4.5 mm; ovary glabrous; fruit unknown.
In unrecorded habitat but to be expected in cerrado near or above 700 m, known only from the type-locality near the source of rio Carinhanha, near 15°S in extreme n.-w. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-H. IX-X(-?).
The type of M. spixiana was misidentified by Bentham as M. interrupta; it is clearly different, however, in absence of pilosulous indumentum, elongate stipules, low leaf-formula (as given in Latin diagnosis) and corolla thinly gland-sprinkled but not resinous.
The leaflet-venation suggests affinity to M. sericantha, but in this case a higher leaf-formula with proportionately smaller leaffets coinciding with ffowers only thinly glandular but not gray-pilosulous are decisively different.
The fruit, when discovered, will perhaps provide stronger clues to its affinities.
The species is named in honor of the Bavarian zoologist Johann Baptist von Spix, Martius's companion in Brazil in the years 1817-1820 and co-author with Martius of the magnificent Reise Brasilien.
76.
Mimosa sericantha Bentham, J. Bot (Hooker) 4: 392.
1841.-"[BrazU.] Prov. Pemambuco, Gardner, n. 2833."-Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = IPA Neg. 1278 = NY Neg. 1858; isotypi, labelled 'Sta. Rosa, distr. of Rio Preto [extreme n.-w. Bahia], BM! K (hb. Hook.)! = IPA Neg. 7277= NY Neg. 77655.-The locality 'Serra da Batalhes [Sa. da Batalha on Piaui-Bahia border near 45°W'], mentioned by Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 357.
1876, was taken from Gardner 2830 (BM! K! = IPA Neg. 7279), conspecific with no. 2833 but not mentioned in the protologue.
Pithecellobium cinereum Martius ex Bentham, Trans, Linn. Soc. London 30: 413.
1875, pro syn. (Martius 2002 from Chapada da Parana, M! = F Neg. 6795).
Mimosa sericantha sensu Bentham, 1875: 413; Lewis, 1987, fig. 8C. Unarmed macrophyllidious arborescent shrubs 2-3 m with trunks attaining 6 cm diam., the terete branchlets, lf-stks and axes of infforescence puberulent with fine antrorse or (on stem) retrorse gray hairs sometimes mixed with random minute sessile glands, the broad, palmately and pinnately veined, when dry bmnnescent lfts smooth and glabrous above or almost so, beneath venulose, thinly pubescent and sprinkled with sessile golden glands 0.05-0.1 mm diam., the inflorescence a leafless pseudoraceme of long narrow fl-spikes exserted 1-3 dm from foliage, the fls extemally gray-silky-strigulose.
Stipules triangular or subulate 1-3.5 x 1-1.5 mm, the firm blades strigulose dorsally, glabrous within, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 3-6 cm, the petiole including firm obese pulvinus 7-22 mm, at middle 0.9-1.4 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 10- 22 mm, the shallow ventral groove intermpted between each pair of pinnae by a bridge but spicules 0; pinnae 2-4-jug., strongly accrescent distally, the rachis of distal pair 3.5-9 cm, the interfoliolar segments 7-14 mm; lfts of distal pair 5-9(-10)-jug., those near mid-rachis longest, the first pair (3-)5-9 mm beyond the subulate, often retrorse paraphyllidia, all broadly oblong-ovate or -obovate emarginate, the longer ones 16-24 (-28) X 9-17 mm, aU 3-4(-5)-nerved from pulvinule, the lateral veins expiring well within the plane margin and, like the costa, giving rise to secondary pinnate venulation, this prominulous only beneath.
Flower-spikes mostly 2-5 per node, the densely-fld axis including short peduncle (3.5-)4.5-10 cm; bracts lanceolate 0.5-0.8 mm, densely puberulent, deciduous; fl-buds plumply ovoid-ellipsoid, densely gray-strigulose overall; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, all bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.8-1 mm, the squatly deltate teeth 0.1-0.2 mm; corolla cream-colored or pinkish, extemally gray-strigulose eglandular, in profile turbinate 2.3-2.7 mm, the ovate acute 1-nerved lobes 1.4-1.6 X 0.8-1.2 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 5-6 mm; ovary pilosulous and yellow-glandular.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) stipitate, the stipe 2-7 mm, the body linear-oblong in profile ±35-65 x 7-8 mm, the slender replum ±0.3 mm wide, the plane papery valves early glabrate but permanently sprinkled with minute, remotely scattered yellow glands, at length separating from replum and breaking up into 6-9 free-falling articles ±7-9 mm long; seeds not seen.—Frontispiece (D-G).
In cerrado at ±300-850 m, local around the w. rim of the S. Francisco basin in lat. 7°30'- 15°S, from upper Parnaiba valley in s.-w. Piaui s. along Espigao Mestre in w. Bahia and adj. Goias to the headwaters of rio Parana, in planaltine Brazil.—Fl.
III-V, X-XI, the full season not established.
Map 11.
Mimosa sericantha is distinguished from related and sympatric Leiocarpae by leaf-formula, broad leaflets gland-dotted beneath, and exserted pseudoraceme or panicle of spikes crowded with gray-strigulose flowers.
The Mimosa seriacantha [sic] of Glaziou (1906: 181) from Minas Gerais ("Serra do Picu, a Barreira") is Piptadenia adiantoides (Spreng.) Macbr.
77.
Mimosa puberula Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 88.
1846.—"Zimapan [Hidalgo] in Mexico, Coulter."
-HoIotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = K Neg. 16895 = NY photo s.n.,
dated 1928! M. puberula sensu Bentham, 1875: 413; B. L. Robinson, 1898: 320; Standley, 1922: 359; Britton & Rose, 1928: 159.
Ofunknown stature (but arborescent according to protologue), the young flowering branches unarmed, these and foliage densely pubemlent with fine whitish hairs 0.1-0.2 mm mixed with reddish granules, the plane thick-textured lfts brown when mature and dry, then thinly puberulent on both faces and dotted beneath with minute immersed yellowish glands scarcely 0.1 mm diam., the dense fl-spikes solitary and geminate, shortly pedunculate in the axil of coevally expanding lvs.
Stipules erect, linear-attenuate 4-5 x 0.5 mm, nerveless extemally.
Leaf-formula vi-vii/16-17, the If-stk 5-6 cm, the petiole ±6-7 x 1 mm, the interpinnal segments 7-10 mm, the ventral sulcus bridged between pinna-pairs but espiculate; rachis of longer/7z>2«<2^ 35-43 mm, the interfoliolar segments 2-2.5 mm, the lfts subequilong except at very end of rachis, the first pair 1-1.5 mm distant from erect paraphyllidia 0.2-0.4 mm, the blades oblong-eUiptic obtuse from bluntly auriculate base, the longer ones 4.5-5.5 x 1.7- 2 mm, all veinless or almost so above, beneath 2-nerved from pulvinule, the weakly prominulous midrib dividing blade ±1:2, the posterior nerve expiring near or beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles stout ± 5-9 mm, bracteate near middle; spikes without filaments ±6 mm diam., the axis 2-3 cm; bracts linear, less than 1 mm, deciduous; flowers either 4- or 5-merous diplostemonous; calyx campanulate ± 1 x 1 mm, thinly puberulent extemally, the rim denticulate, the teeth not over 0.2 mm; corolla turbinate ±2.5 mm, the ovate acute 1-nerved lobes ± 1 x 1 mm; filaments free or nearly so, exserted 4.5 mm; style attenuate at apex; ovary pilosulous; pod unknown.
In unrecorded habitat, known only from the type-collection, reputedly from the upper Moctezuma valley, near 20°45'N, 99°30'W, in Hidalgo, Mexico.
Mimosa puberula differs from all spicate Mexican mimosas other than M. tenuiflora in dorsally gland-dotted leaflets, and from this in partly pentamerous flowers, minute erect, not cucullately incurved calyx-teeth, and simply pilosulous, not pilosulous and glandular ovaries.
The pod, when discovered, may provide further differential characters.
The type is unarmed, but it would be no surprise to learn that older branches are armed like those of M. tenuiflora.
Whether pentamerous or tetramerous flowers prevail in the species will bear on interpretation of the affinities of the species, at present indecipherable.
If the locality at Zimapan, near 1800 meters on the Gulf slope of Sa.
Madre Oriental, is correct, the ecology of the species must be very different from that of M. tenuiflora, which enters Mexico from the south only in lowland thom-scrub in Pacific Chiapas and Oaxaca.
Mimosa puberula is here provisionally referred to ser. Leiocarpae.
No compatriot spicate species appears at all close to it.
78.
Mimosa pteridifolia Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4; 391.
1841.-"Brazil, Pohl; Serra Acurua, Blanchet, n. 2850; Prov. Goyaz, Gardner n. 4123."
, the data expanded in Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 355.
1876: ".
.
. prope Capilla de Passe [=Posse], provinciae Goyaz: Gardner n. 4123; ad Fazenda do Cap.
Vicente et Lavrinhas: Pohl; in Serra d'A9urua provinciae Bahiensis: Blanchet n. 2850.
.
. ."—Lectotypus, Pohl d. 1421 = 1728 from locality just cited [on rio das Almas at 15°S, 49°10'W in centr. Goias], K! = IPA Neg. 1273; isotypi, NY! W!—The syntypi represent respectively: M. pteridifolia (Gardner 4123, BM! G! K! = IPA Negs.
7277, 727'^)andM. gemmulata\ar. adamantina (Blanchet 2850, BM! M! W!).
M. pteridifolia var. affinis Rizzini, Rodriguesia 55: 17.
1980.-" ... via Xavantina-Sao Felix, MT, 7?.
R. dos Santos et al. 7227."-Holotypus, RB 1657291; isotypi, K! NY! M. pteridifolia var. paucipinnata Rizzini, Rodriguesia 55:17.
1980. —".
.
. in cerrado 270 km a Xavantina, MT, /.
A. Ratter et al. 1581 "-Holotypus, RB 1657281; isotypus, NY! M. pteridifolia sensu Bentham, 1875: 412; 1876: 355, ex parte, exclusis speciminibus supra indicatis, etiam Pohl s.n. ex Furado [=Fanado, hodie Minas Novas, Minas Gerais] necnon St. Hilaire s.n. quae omnia = M. gemmulata var. gemmulata; sensu Rizzini, Rodriguesia 55: 17.
1980, exclus.
Macedo 4296 quae = M. gemmulata var. cristallina.
Unarmed, potentially arborescent shrubs (1_)1.5-3.5 m with stout, densely leafy ascending or arcuately geotropic stems passing upward into a leaffess virgate pseudoraceme or panicle of amentiform spikes exserted 1.5-6 dm from expanded foliage, the homotinous branchlets, lfstks and axes of infforescence either puberulent or densely pilosulous with incumbent or with stiffer spreading, mostly lutescent hairs to 0.15- 0.7 mm intermixed with many sessile spherical golden glands ±0.1 mm diam., the firm, marginally revolute lfts bicolored, brownish and either glabrous or pubescent above, beneath paler. dotted with golden glands but glabrous except for ciliolate midrib.
Stipules subulate or linearlance-attenuate 1.5-7 X 0.3-0.8(-l) mm, subpersistent.
Leaf-stalks of major lvs 4-14(-16) cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 4-13 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 4-9 mm, the ventral groove continuous or at times weakly bridged between pairs of pinnae, but spicules 0; pinnae of lar%erl\s 9-24-jug., strongly decrescent proximally, less or scarcely so distally, the rachis of longer ones 3-6(-7.5) cm, its longer interfoliolar segments 1-2.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (22-)25-40-jug., gradually decrescent upward from near or below mid-rachis, the first pair close above the subulate paraphyllidia, the blades oblong, obtuse or emarginate, at base obliquely tmncate and bluntly auriculate on proximal side, the longer blades 3-5(-5.5) x (1-)1.2-2 mm, aU dorsally carinate by the slender centric costa, otherwise extemally veinless.
Spikes 1-3 per node, the axis of longer ones, including short peduncle, 4.5-11 cm; bracts submembranous spatulate or linear-oblanceolate 0.3-1.2 mm, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, many functionally staminate; fl-buds obovoid; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate 0.8-1 mm, the thinly pilosulous ciliolate teeth deltate-triangular 0.2-0.4 mm, separated by broad sinuses; corolla broadly turbinate 1.9-2.2 mm, the ovate acute 1-nerved, pink-purple lobes 0.8-1.3 x 0.8- 1.1 mm, at anthesis widely spreading, dorsally pilosulous and gland-sprinkled; filaments pink, free, the longer ones exserted 5-7.5 mm.
Pods ascending or spreading, the Unear-oblong planocompressed body contracted at base into a stipe ±1.5-2 mm, in profile 25-40 x 4-6 mm, the gently constricted replum ±0.4 mm wide, the replum and valves alike densely yellow-pilosulous and golden-glandular overall, the ripe valves papery, breaking up into 5-7 free-falling oblong articles 4-7 mm long, each at middle coUiculate over the seed; ripe seeds not seen.
In cerrado, cerradao, campo sujo, and at edge of gallery woodland, 800-1250 m, locally common in the central Brazilian Planalto, from Sa. do Roncador in e. Mato Grosso e. to Espigao Mestre in w. Bahia, s. through middle and e. Goias and Distrito Federal to Sa. dos Cristais, thence weakly e. to centr. Minas Gerais (Varzea da Palma).-n. II-VI. Map.
12.
Mimosa pteridifolia was the first described member of a group widespread in planaltine BraMAP 12.
Planaltine and e. Brazil.
Ranges of M. lewisii Bameby and M. pteridifolia Bentham. zil and locally disjunct in Venezuela.
The name is here restricted to plants with relatively broad, marginally revolute and consequently dorsally concave leaflets, and with no spicules between pinna-pulvinules.
So defined, it is the dominant member of its immediate group in highland Goias and adjoining Mato Grosso and is known so far from only one station in Minas Gerais, where it is otherwise replaced by M. gemmulata var. gemmulata.
Bentham's concept of Af. pteridifolia included from the first an element of M. gemmulata.
As coUections have accumulated, the heterogeneous nature of M. pteridifolia sensu Bentham has become more evident, and dispersal patterns of its constituent parts have emerged.
The variation has been analyzed in part by Rizzini (1980), who recognized four varieties.
One of these is equivalent to M. gemmulata of this account.
The var. affinis Rizzini was mistakenly described as aculeate.
The holotype of var. paucipinnata shows only some upper leaves which, as often happens, are simpler than primary cauline leaves present in the isotype at NY (pinnae to 12-jug.!).
79.
Mimosa adenophylla Taubert, Flora 75: 72.
1892.—Typus infra sub var. adenophylla indicatur.
Assurgent or diflFiisely trailing, potentially subarborescent shrubs attaining 3 m, the robust often livid stems and dorsal rib of lf-stks commonly armed with broad-based recurved aculei 0.5-4 mm, but these at times small, few, or even (var. mitis) wanting, either thinly or densely pilosulous with spreading plain hairs and charged throughout, except for upper face of lfts, with sessile pale golden, spherical or lentiform glands to ±0.1 mm diam., the foliage bicolored, when dry rich olivaceous or brown above, beneath dull paler green or cinnamon-brown, the inflorescence a leafless or proximally leafy-bracteate, simple or few-branched pseudoraceme of narrow amentiformfl-spikesexserted 0.5-3(-4) dm above foliage.
Stipules firm lance-subulate, often loosely involute 1.5-4 mm, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 3- 12 cm, the petiole (6-)10-25 x 0.6-1.6 mm, the longer interpinnal segments (5-)6-13 mm, the ventral groove continuous between proximal pirma-pairs but a smafl spicule between 1 or more distal ones; pinnae 4-10(-12)-jug., proximally decrescent, the rachis of longer ones (3.5-)4-8 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-2.5(-3) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 18-36-jug., decrescent upward from near or below mid-rachis, in outline oblong obtuse or subemarginate, straight or gently falcate, the longer ones 4-8 x 1.3-3 mm. the blades all dorsally concave and low-carinate by the centric costa, otherwise extemally veinless.
Flower-spikes 1-5 per node of inflorescence, their axis including short peduncle 5.5-12 cm; bracts linear-spatulate 0.5-0.9 mm, caducous; flbuds plumply obovoid, pilosulous or subglabrous but always gland-sprinkled; flowers 4-, rarely 5-merous diplostemonous, most or all bisexual; calyx shallowly campanulate or bowlshaped (0.3-)0.5-0.7 mm, the low-deltate ciliolate teeth 0.1-0.15 mm; corolla turbinate 1.9- 2.5 mm, the ovate acute, nearly plane membranous lobes 0.8-1.3 x 0.5-0.9 mm, delicately 1-nerved; filaments pink, free, the longer ones exserted 6-7.5 mm; ovary white-pilosulous.
Pods (of var. mitis; of other vars. unknown) broadly linear ±20-40 x 5-7 mm, 5-8-seeded, contracted at base into an obscure stipe not over 1 mm, the shallowly constricted replum 0.4-0.7 mm wide, the papery valves densely softly pilosulous and golden-glandular overall, breaking up when ripe into free-falling, shallowly biconvex indehiscent articles 4-6 mm long; seeds not seen.
Mimosa adenophylla is closely akin to M. pteridifolia, from which it diflfers in some combination of these characters: prickly stems, spicules between some distal pairs of pinnae, fewer (4- 12, not 9-24) pairs of pinnae in larger leaves, ampler leaflets (to 4-9, not 3.5-5 mm long), and dispersal at usually lower elevations along and eastward from rio S. Francisco.
Prickly stems alone readily distinguish both var. adenophylla and var. armandiana from all M. pteridifolia, and few (4-7) pairs of pinnae the unarmed var. mitis.
So far as known, interpinnal spicules are diagnostic for M. adenophylla sensu lato.
The also related M. gemmulata is represented in the range of M. adenophylla, but mostly at greater elevations, by two varieties, easily separable in practice by very small plane leaflets mostly less than 4 X 1.5 mm.
The known populations of M. adenophylla are diverse in detail.
They seem to fall into three groups deserving taxonomic status.
Key to varieties of M. adenophylla 1.
Stems aculeate; upper face of lfts glabrous; s. Bahia and Minas Gerais.
2.
Rs 4-merous 8-androus; calyx 0.5-0.7 mm; s. Bahia and n.-e. Minas Gerais 79a. var. armandiana (p. 146).
2.
Fls 5-merous 10-androus; calyx 0.3 mm; e. Minas Gerais (S. Gon9alo do Rio Preto) 79b. var. adenophylla (p. 146).
1.
Stems unarmed; upper face of lfts villosulous; n. Bahia and adj. Pernambuco, w.-centr. Ceara 79c. var. mitis (p. 146).
79a. Mimosa adenophylla Taubert var. armandiana (Rizzini) Bameby, Brittonia 37: 129.
1985, based on M. pteridifolia var. armandiana Rizzini, Rodriguesia 55: 17, fig. 5.
1980.— " .
.
. haud procul ab Itaobim, MG, legerunt A. de Mattos Filho & C. T. Rizzini 2.
IV.1979 "-Holotypus, RB 188974 (6 sheets)! paratypus, Armando de Mattos Filho 1080, not seen.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In caatinga scmb, mata de cipo, and becoming weedy along sandy roadsides, 200-500 m, apparently local in middle S. Francisco valley in s.-w. Bahia (lower rio Corrente; Caetite) and s. e. through upper Pardo valley to lower Jequitinhonha valley in n.-e. Minas Gerais.—Fl.
I V - VIII. 79b. Mimosa adenophylla Taubert var. adenophylla.
M. adenophylla Taubert, 1892, sens, str.—".
.
. in Brasilia austro-orientali loco non indicato [but fide Glaziou, 1906: 184, at Sao Gon9alo do Rio Preto, Minas Gerais], Glaziou n. 12645."-Holotypus, +B = F Neg. 1394; isotypi C! F! = F Neg. 54799, G! K (2 sheets)! = NY Negs.
1918, 11657, M! P (3sheets)! Strongly armed throughout, but seemingly not decisively diflferent from var. armandiana except in 5-merous flowers.
Habitat not recorded and known only from the type-collection.
79c. Mimosa adenophylla Taubert var. mitis Bameby, Brittonia 37: 130.
1985.—"BrazU.
Bahia: Sa. do Angelim, mun. Sento Se, 10°37'S, 41°28'W, 2 Sep 1981 (fl, fr), /.
D. C. Arouck Ferreira 79."—Holotypus K! = NY Neg. 11631; isotypus, NY! Characters as given in key to varieties.
In carrasco or cerrado-caatinga transition, at elevations not recorded, known from lower S. Francisco valley in municipio Sento Se, n.-centr. Bahia, and adj. s.-w. Pernambuco; and (at present) disjunctly from w.-centr. Ceara in lat. ±4°- 5°S.—Fl.
IV-IX.—Jurema cor-de-rosa.
80.
Mimosa gemmulata Bameby, Brittonia 37: 130.
1985.—Typus sub var. gemmulata indicatur.
Slender shrubs 1-2.5 m or (var. adamantina) potentiaUy arborescent and attaining 4 m with tmnk to 6 cm diam., with angulate, often longitudinally striped leafless annotinous branches and densely leafy subpaniculate homotinous ones ±1-4 dm, these with axes of lvs and inflorescence pilosulous with erect straight or merely puberulent with forwardly incurved simple hairs to 0.1-0.9 mm intermixed with sessile spherical glands ±0.1 mm diam., the small crowded plane lfts bicolored when mature, above brown glabrous ± lustrous, beneath paler gland-sprinkled, minutely ciliolate, the fl-spikes mostly from axils of already expanded distal lvs, forming a contracted or rarely an extended panicle.
Stipules triangular or triangular-subulate 0.4-1 (-2) mm, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks of major lvs 3-10.5 cm, the petiole including hard pulvinus 2-16 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 2.5-7 mm, the ventral groove between all or at least between some distal pairs of pinnae with a slender, often puberulent spicule 0.2-0.6 mm; pinnae of larger lvs (7-) 10-38-, commonly less than 20-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 12- 55 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 18-55-jug., subequilong except near either end of rachis, the first pair shortly above a pair of subulate paraphyllidia, the blades oblong, oblong-eUiptic or (var. cristallina) ovate, obtuse, at base inequilaterally rounded or obliquely subtmncate, the longest 1.4- 5(-5.5) X 0.45-1.5 mm, ±1.5-5 times as long as wide.
Axis of flower-spikes including short peduncle (4-)5-12(-13) cm; bracts minute, spatulate or oblanceolate, deciduous;flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some functionally male, the buds globose or plumply obovoid; calyx crateriform or shallowly campanulate (0.3-)0.4-0.8 mm, thinly pilosulous or glabrate extemally, the teeth 0.1- 0.3 mm, separated by wide sinuses; corollas pink or creamy-pink, broadly turbinate (1.5-) 1.7-2.4 mm, the ovate subacute 1-nerved lobes 1-1.3 x 0.65-0.8(-l) mm, thinly pilosulous and glandsprinkled dorsally; filaments pink or at times (fading?) whitish, the longer ones exserted 4-8 mm, all free to base.
Pods ascending, sessile or (var. adamantina) shortly stipitate, the body narrowly oblong, when fully fertile 15-50 X (3_)3,5- 5.5(-6) mm, the replum 0.5-0.8 mm wide, shallowly constricted between fertile segments and deeply so at some abortive ones, the papery valves separating entire from replum and tardily breaking transversely into 3-9 segments 4-7(-8) mm long; seeds (of var. gemmulata) ovate or oblongobovate 3-3.4 X 2.2-2.8 mm, the smooth but scarcely lustrous testa brown or mottled.
Various forms of M. gemmulata were encountered before 1850 by Blanchet, Pohl and Martius, but the species lay concealed within a loosely defined M. pteridifolia until partly extricated in 1980 as var. nanophylla Rizz.
From the closely related M. pteridifolia it is readily separable by small plane-margined, nearly always narrower leaflets, by small spicules between all or most pairs of pinnae, and by an inflorescence leafy at anthesis.
It also has prevailingly smaller stipules and a pod (not well known, however) minutely puberulent rather than pilosulous between the array of sessile golden glands.
Morphological variation in M. gemmulata is correlated with dispersal and permits recognition of five varieties.
The epithet gemmulata refers to the gemlike glands that pave the lower face of the leaflets.
Key to varieties of M. gemmulata Pinnae of longer lvs 9-20-, rarely (in Sa. do Espinha^o) to 30-jug., but if over 20-jug. then the rachis of longest less than 2 cm; filaments exserted 4-6 mm; pod 15-30 x 3.5-5.5 mm; Goias, Bahia and Minas Gerais.
2.
Lfts oblong, the larger ones 2.5-4 times as long as wide; fully fertile pods 3-6-seeded; dispersed through Chapada Diamantina and Sa. do Espinha^o in interior Bahia and Minas Gerais e. of rio S. Francisco, and disjunct in Venezuela.
3.
Brazilian; young stems and lf-stks usually only minutely pilosulous or puberulent with hairs 0.1- 0.4 mm, if (rarely, in Bahia) some hairs longer then the largest lfts less than 2.5 mm.
4.
Rachis of longer pinnae 12-17(-30) mm and its lfts 15-25(-27)-jug.; longest lfts 1.4-2.5 x 0.45-0.7 mm; pod sessile or almost so; shmbs l-2(-2.5) m; Sa. do Espinhago n.-ward from 20°30' to 15'*30'S and disjunct on middle rio das Contas near 14°S in s.-e. Bahia 80a. var. gemmulata (p. 148).
4.
Rachis of longer pinnae 25-55 mm and its lfts 30-57-jug.; longest lfts commonly 2-5 x 0.6- 1(-1.5) mm, but sometimes as in var. gemmulata; pod either sessile or contracted at base into a stipe (1-)2-4 mm; taller shmbs or treelets (2-)2.5-4 m; Chapada Diamantina in lat. 10''20'-14°S, n. just into s.-e. Piaui 80b. var. adamantina (p. 148).
3.
Venezuelan; young stems and lf-stks densely pilosulous with erect hairs to 0.5-0.9 mm; lf-formula vu-xiii/(18-)21~34, the longest lfts 2.5-4 mm 80c. var. segrex (p. 150).
2.
Lfts ovate, the larger ones not over 1.5 times as long as wide; fully fertile pods 4-9-seeded; dispersed locally in s.-e. Goias (Sa. dos Cristais) and the Triangulo Mineiro 80d. var. cristallina (p. 151).
1.
Pinnae of longer lvs 27-38-jug., and rachis of longer ones to 35^5 mm; filaments exserted to 6-8 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 45-54-jug., in shape and size like those of var. gemmulata; pod attaining 50 x 6 mm; e. Mato Grosso 80e. var. occidentalis (p. 151).
80a. Mimosa gemmulata Bameby var. gemmulata.—"Brazil.
Minas Gerais: 'circa Farada,' i.e.. Villa Fanado, now Minas Novas, near 16°35'S, 42°45'W, anno 1820, /.
E. Pohl d 1392 = i^07."-Holotypus, NY!; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 13611 F! = F Neg. 54856, K! US! W! Fig.
5 (F-I).
M. pteridifolia var. nanophylla Rizzini, Rodriguesia 55: 17.
1980.-".. . ad Pedra Azul-Itaobim, MG. leg. G. M[endes] Magalhaes 15017 (RB 105514).
Minas Gerais, A. St. Hilaire ... RB 43898.
Montes Claros, MG .
.
.
F. Markgraf, M. Barreto & A. C. Brade 10.
XI.38 (RB 39825 e 39826)."-Holotypus not indicated in protologue, the name therefore technically invalid.
Shrubs 1-2 m; lf-stks of major lvs 3-8 cm, the petiole only 2-4(-5) mm, the interpinnal segments 2.5-5 mm; pinnae 10-19 (exceptionally -29)-jug., the rachis of longer ones 12-27(-30) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 18-30-jug., the larger ones 14-25 x 0.45-0.7 mm;pcxiy subsessile, when fully fertilized 3-5-seeded.
In cerrado, campo mpestre and caatinga, 650- 1100 m, cisfranciscan Minas Gerais and s.-e. Bahia: locally common in Sa. do Espinha^o n.-ward from Diamantina, in lat. 15°30-18°30'S; apparently disjunct near 20°30'S (Congonhas do Campo), and n.-ward near 14°S in middle Contas valley (near Jequie), where confluent with var. adamantina.
Fl.
XII-II, sporadically later.
Map 13.
All but one collection of var. gemmulata seen from northem Minas Gerais are alike in having 10-19 pairs of pinnae less than 3 cm long and longer leaflets no more than 2.5 mm long. An example from Grao Mogol (CFCR 9670) simulates var. adamantina in foliage.
The one record from southeastern Minas Gerais (Glaziou 12643, NY) has to 29 pairs of pinnae but is otherwise not different.
Typical var. gemmulata occurs in the Contas valley (near Jequie), but the species is represented close by in Sa.
Geral by populations intermediate to var. adamantina.
80b. Mimosa gemmulata Bameby var. adamantina Bameby, Brittonia 37: 132, fig. 3 J-L. 1985.—"Brazil.
Bahia: Sa. do Acurua, Blanchet 2550."—Holotypus, G!; isotypi, BM! NY! Fig.
5 (J-L).
Arborescent when mature, attaining 2.5-4 m; petioles 5-16 mm; longer interpinnal segments 4-7 mm; pinnae 10-15-jug., the rachis of longer ones 2.5-5.5 cm; lfts of longer pinnae 30-57-jug., the longer ones (1.6-)2-5 x (0.45-)0.6-l mm, 3-4(-5) times as long as wide; stipe of/7c>(^(Lewis, 1987, fig. 8J) 2-4 mm, the body ±25-30 x 4 mm, 4-6-seeded, the replum sometimes incipiently aculeolate.
Forming shrubby thickets in cerrado, carrasco, campo geral, and capoeira, (500-)950-1200 m, locally plentiful on both slopes of Chapada Diamantina, in lat. 10°20'-14°S, centr. upland Bahia, and collected once in s.-e. Piaui.—Fl.
I-IV (-V).
Map 13.
This is a generally well marked entity, differing from var. gemmulata in greater stature at maturity, ampler, relatively long-petiolate leaves, and more numerous, usually longer leaffets.
The pod, known as yet from only one example, appears distinct in its stipe and in incipient aculeoli of the replum, which is perfectly unarmed in aarrmvuA FIG. 5.
Mimosa exalbescens Bameby (A-E) and M. gemmulata Bameby var. gemmulata (F-I) and var. adamantina (J-L).
A. Leaf.
B. Leaflet, dorsal view.
C. Bract + flower.
D. Pod.
E. Seed (aU from Eiten 10798).
F. Leaf G. Pinna.
H. Leaflet, ventral (left) and dorsal (right) views.
I. Rower + bract.
J. Leaf.
K. Pinna.
L. Leaflet, dorsal view. (F-I from Irwin 22990, J-L from Irwin 30775.) other forms of the species.
The type-collection topolis in west-central Bahia are referred proof var. adamantina contributed to the protologue visionally to var. adamantina, but may deserve of M. pteridifolia. independent status.
They are remarkable for Four collections (NY) from municipio Crisstems and leaf-stalks charged with fimbriolate or MAP 13.
Tropical South America.
Range of Af. gemmulata Bameby. substellate setulae, in EAC 11360 many and to 1.5 mm long, in EAC 11361 fewer and less than 1 mm, and in Hatschbach 39486 and EAC 3702 shorter still (medusiform) and easily overlooked.
The fmit is sessile, and the articulation of the valves much delayed.
80c. Mimosa gemmulata Bameby var. segrex Bameby, var. nov., quoad foliomm formulam inter var. gemmulatam et var. adamantinam quasi intermedia, ab ambabus ramulorum homotinomm necnon foliomm axium pube longiori ac densiori e piUs erectis 0.5-0.9 mm usque longis constanti vix diversa sed patria remotissima notabiUs.—Venezuela.
Lara: entre Paso Real y Quibor, 1000 m, 9°52'N, 69°27'W, 7.vii.l974 (fl), /.
A. Steyermark 110258.- Holotypus, F1804150 = NY Neg. 11897; isotypus, VEN.
M. trianae sensu Pittier, 1927: 68; non Bentham.
Erect or trailing shrubs 1-3 m; young branches and If-axes pilosulous with erect hairs to 0.5-0.9 mm; leaf-stalks of major lvs (2-)3-6 cm, the petiole 3-7 mm, the interpinnal segments 2.5-5 mm; pinnae 7-13-jug., the rachis of longer ones (17-)20-35 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (18-)21- 34-jug., the longer ones 2.5-4 x 0.7-1.1 mm; pods (few seen) subsessile, 1-3-seeded.
In chaparral on dry rocky hiflsides, ±850-1450 m, known only from the state of Lara (vicinity of Quibor and Humocara), Venezuela.—R. II, W\\-\y.(-')).-Sinfin.
Map 13.
The var segrex, remotely isolated from the main Brazilian range of M. gemmulata, is intermediate in leaf-formula between var. gemmulata and var. adamantina, and seems not to differ further from either except in the longer denser pubescence of more erect hairs.
It has passed in Venezuela as M. trianae, a Colombian mimosa fundamentally different in dense stellate indumentum of hypophyllum and corolla, and in white filaments.
The trans-Amazonian disjunction between var. segrex and other varieties of M. gemmulata has a parallel in Senna macranthera var. quadrifoUolata (Pittier) I. & B., which is closely sympatric with var. segrex in Lara (cf. Irwin & Bameby, 1982: 187).
SOd.
Mimosa gemmulata Bameby var. cristallina Bameby, var. nov., a var. gemmulata imprimis foliolis ovatis pro rata duplo latioribus, majoribus 1.2-2.8 x 0.7-1.5 mm, ulterius caulium homotinomm axi foliato magis extenso, legumine 4-9 (nec 3-5)-spermo necnon dispersione remota recognoscenda.—Brazil.
Goias: Sa. dos Cristais, ±10 km w. of Cristalina, 4.
III.1966 (ff), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 75^57.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Resembling var. gemmulata in stature, but the leafy homotinous axis and infforescence more extended, mostly 3-4 dm; petioles 3-7 cm; pinnae 10-15-jug., the rachis of longer ones 14-25 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20-40-jug., ovate 1.2- 2.8 X 0.7-1.5 mm, at least half as long as wide; pods 20-45 X 4-6 mm, when fertile 4-9-seeded.
In campo sujo, 850-1200 m, remotely detached from var. gemmulata on Sa. dos Cristais in s.-e. Goias and on the highlands of the Triangulo (near Uberlandia) in w. Minas Gerais.—Fl.
II-III. Map 13.
80e. Mimosa gemmulata Bameby var. occidentalis Bameby, var. nov., ab aliis speciei formis pinnis numerosis 27-38 (nec 9-20, raro 29)- jugis usque separata; a M. amnis-atri pinnamm majorum rachi 35-45 (nec 7-18) mm longis foliolisque suis 45-54 (nec 20-26)-jugis diversa.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso do Sul: rod.
BR 364 in mun. Alto Gargas, 15.
XL1973 (ff), Hatschbach (with Koczicki) ii2J7.—Holotypus, NY.
Shrubs and treelets ±1.5-2 m; lf-stks 10-17 cm; pinnae of longer lvs 27-38-jug., the rachis of longer ones 35-45 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 45-54-jug., the larger ones ±2.5-2.8 x 0.6-0.7 mm; longer filaments exserted 6-8 mm; pods sessile, attaining 50 x 6 mm. ±9-seeded (not seen fully ripe).
In campo cerrado ±800 m, known only from the vicinity of the type-locality near 17°S, 5 3°30'W in e. Mato Grosso (Norte).—R. XI-XII. Map 13.
The plants described as var. occidentalis differ from other races of M. gemmulata in elongate leafstalks and multifoliolate pinnae.
Leaf-formula without corroboration by other characters is generally not dependable for taxonomic purposes, but var. occidentalis is physically isolated (so far as presently known) 600 km west of var. cristallina and much more distantly so from vars. gemmulata and adamantina which it more nearly resembles in shape of leaffets.
81.
Mimosa amnis-atri Bameby, sp. nov., indiciis fere omnibus cum M. gemmulata conveniens, sed foliomm ambitu angustorum formula, pinnis valde numerosis inter se confertis, foliolisque minutis abstans: foliorum majorum pinnae 35-49-jugae, rachi 7-18 mm tantum longa; foliola 20-26-juga, longiora 1.2- 1.6 X 0.45-0.6 mm.—Brazil.
Goias: Sa. do Rio Preto ± 5 km e. of Goias boundary on road to Guarapaua in Minas Gerais, 16.
IX. 1965 (ff), Irwin (with Souza and Reis dos Santos) 7(?277.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Unarmed, elaborately microphyllidious shrub with several stout, obliquely erect, densely foliate simple stems ± 1.5 m, near middle 4-7 mm diam., passing upward into a pseudoraceme of long amentiform ff-spikes exserted in early anthesis 2-4 dm beyond coevally expanded lvs but probably hysteranthously leafy, the upper stems, lfstks and axes of infforescence pilosulous with erect or ascending yellowish hairs to 0.25-0.6 mm intermixed with scattered sessile spherical golden glands ±0.1 mm diam., the minute crowded plane-margined lfts bicolored, above brown glabrous, beneath thinly pilosulous and golden-glandular, finely ciliolate.
Stipules subulate 2-2.5 X 0.2-0.3 mm, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of major lvs 6-12.5 cm, the petiole no longer than the dilated pulvinus, the longer interpinnal segments 2-2.5 mm, the ventral groove intermpted between most or some distal pairs of pinnae by a minute stramineous spicule; pinnae 35- 49-jug., of subequal length or slightly decrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 7-18 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20-26-jug., very slightly decrescent distally, the first pair close to subulate paraphyllidia, the blades oblong or elliptic-oblong from obliquely truncate base, obtuse at apex, the longest 1.2-1.6 x 0.45-0.6 mm, all faintly costate dorsally but otherwise extemally veinless.
Spikes solitary or geminate, the axis including peduncle 8-15 cm; bracts lanceolate 0.3-0.6 mm; ff-buds subglobose;y7ow^r5 4(-5)-merous 8(-10)- androus, many functionally staminate with abortive pistil; calyx shallowly campanulate ±0.7 mm, the teeth 0.3-0.4 mm, separated by broad sinuses; corolla pink-cream, broadly turbinate in profile, 1.5-1.9 mm, the ovate subacute 1-nerved lobes 0.7-0.9 x 0.6-0.9 mm, thinly pubemlent and gland-sprinkled dorsally; filaments pink, free, the longer ones exserted 5-6 mm; ovary thinly pilosulous; pod unknown.
In cerrado on summit of a chapada at 1000 m, known only from the type-locality close to the Goias-Minas boundary at 16°5'S, 46°45'W.— R. XI-I(-?).-'Guarapaua' of Irwin's field-book and labels probably = Garapuava of maps.
While I entertain no doubt as to the close affinity of M. amnis-atri to M. gemmulata, I am uneasy about its status as a distinct species.
The long narrow leaves composed of very numerous, crowded pairs of abbreviated pinnae furnished with as many as 20-26 pairs of minute crowded leaffets are visually arresting, but could be interpreted as an extreme modification within M. gemmulata sensu lato.
Reassessment of its taxonomic rank is best postponed until the fruit becomes known. in SE Piaui, 15 Jan 1982 (ff), G. P. Lewis (with H. P. N. Pearson) 707^."-Holotypus, CEPEC!; isotypi, K! NY! Shrubs attaining 1.5(-?) m with livid branches and small sensitive dark green lvs, armed at most nodes with 1 infrapetiolar and 2 infrastipular erect aculei 0.5-3 mm and at times with random intemodal ones, the young growth minutely pubemlent and livid-granular almost overall, the plane concolorous Ifts smooth glabrous above, gland-dotted beneath, the loose ff-spikes racemose-paniculate exserted.
Stipules erect linearattenuate ± 3 ^ X 0.5 mm, deciduous.
Z/^<2/-5^fl/fo 3-4 cm, unarmed or randomly aculeolate dorsally, the petiole 4-12 mm, the interpinnal segments (3-)4-7 mm, the ventral sulcus interrupted between pinna-pairs by an ascending spicule 0.4-0.7 mm; pinnae 4-7-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 12-25 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.9-1.3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 14-17-jug., a little decrescent at each end ofrachis, the first pair 0.4-1 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.4 mm, all narrowly oblong-obtuse from obtusangulate base, the larger ones 3.2-4.5 x 0.7-1.3 mm, 3-4.4 times as long as wide, all veinless except for weak centric costa dorsally discolored.
Axis offlowerspikes including short peduncle 6-7 cm; bracts linear-oblanceolate 0.6-0.7 mm, deciduous; ffbuds plumply obovoid, not angulate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx ±0.8 mm, puberulent extemally, the rim subundulate; corolla turbinate ±2.4 mm, the ovate 1-nerved, nearly plane, when fresh pale pink lobes ±1 x 0.8 mm; filaments pale pink, free to base, the four longer ones exserted ±6 mm; many ffs staminate, the ovary of few bisexual ones glandular-papillate; pod unknown.
Fig.
6 (D-F).
In caatinga on orange soil at 350 m, known only from s. slope of Sa.
Piaui shortly s. of the Bahia line at long. 42°W.-R. I-II. It is conjectured that this imperfectly known mimosa is related to M. adenophylla, which it resembles in dorsally gland-dotted leaffets and spicate pink ffowers.
Its smaU leaves, reduced leaf-formula and plane-margined leaffets are distinctive.
82.
Mimosa nothopteris Bameby, Brittonia 37: 133, fig. 2D-E. 1985.—"BrazU.
Bahia: track- 83.
Mimosa fiebrigii Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. way from rodovia BR 235 toward Curral Novo Regni Veg. 9:9.
1910.—"Paraguay: In glareosis pr. Yevica .
.
.
Hassler no. 10335, leg. Rojas; id. San Luis, trockener Berg Campo, ffor. et fmct. mens. Mart. [1909]; Fiebrig no. 4476 .
.
.; id. Centurion, ffor. mens. Nov. [1908]; Fiebrig no. 4239 .
.
. (forma paulo densius induta)."-Lectotypus, Fiebrig 4476, G (4 sheets)!,
one = F Neg. 28208; isotypi, BM! E! L! M! P! Z!; syntypi, Rojas in Hassler 10335, G! Fiebrig 4239, BM! E! G! GH! L! M! P! M. anisitsii Bameby in herb.,
nom. ined.—Estancia La Paz, Paraguay, 2.
XII. 1896, /.
D. Anisits 2446, S (herb.
RegneU.) = NY Neg. 11843.
M. fiebrigii sensu Bernardi, Boissiera 35: 147.
1984.
Unarmed, densely amply microphyllidious subarborescent shrubs attaining 2-3 m, with glabrate older branches, the homotinous stems, Ifaxes and peduncles densely softly viUosulous with erect hairs to 0.2-0.4 mm mixed with minute sessile yellow glands, the Ifts bicolored, when dry brown sublustrous glabrous above, beneath paler, impressed-glandular-punctate and often pubemlent, finely minutely ciliolate, the ellipsoid capitula solitary or geminate in axils of coevally expanding or hysteranthous lvs, either immersed in foliage or in praefforation shortly racemose exserted.
Stipules erect, subulate-setiform 1.5-2 mm, dorsally puberulent, in age deciduous.
Leafstalks (3.5-)4-7 cm, the petiole including hard obese pulvinus 4-9 mm, above pulvinus 0.5-1.2 mm diam., the interpinnal segments (2-)3-6 mm, the ventral sulcus bridged between pairs of pinnae and there charged with an ascending spicule 0.5-1 mm; pinnae (8-) 10-16-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones (2-)2.5-5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.8 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (20-)25-49-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.2-0.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.6 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from deeply semicordate base, obtuse or deltately apiculate at apex, those near mid-rachis (2-)2.4- 3.8 X 0.6-1.2 mm, 3.1-4.7 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 1-3-nerved, the slender, simple or faintly pinnate, straight costa oblique, becoming subcentric beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles 10-19 mm, randomly 1-2-bracteolate near apex; capitula without filaments 7-12 x 4- 5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the densely packed, plumply obovoid ff-buds pilosulous and charged with sessile golden glands; bracts linearoblanceolate 0.7-1.4 mm, minutely glandularpubemlent, tardily deciduous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, many lower ones staminate; calyx membranous 0.5-0.6 mm, the triangular, often unequal teeth 0.1-0.3 mm, minutely ciliolate; corolla of lower ffs turbinate-vase-shaped 1.7-2 mm, of upper bisexual ones vase-shaped 2-2.3 mm, the tube glabrous, the membranous ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.6-1 x 0.6-0.8 mm, a triffe thickened at tip, puberulent and glandular extemally; filaments vivid purple-pink, united below ovary into an obscure stemonozone, exserted 3-4 mm; anthers yellow 0.35-0.4 mm.
Pods either solitary or ascending 2-5 together from near end of receptacle, stipitate, the stipe 1.5-4 mm, either linear or upwardly dilated, the seminiferous body undulately linear in profile, gently incurved, when well fertilized 35-75 x 5.5-8.5 mm, 6-12-seeded, the constricted replum 0.5- 0.8 mm wide, the stiffly papery valves coUiculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike softly gray-villosulous with fine erect whitish hairs ±0.2-0.3 mm and charged with scattered sessile golden glands, when ripe breaking up into freefalling indehiscent articles 4-6 mm long; seeds (few seen) obovate in profile, low-umbonate at middle of each face, the fawn-brown testa microscopically pitted.
In campo thickets near 400 m, the microhabitat not recorded, locally plentiful but apparently restricted to upper watershed of rio Apa in depto Amambay, Paraguay; first collected in 1896 by J. D. Anisits at "Estancia La Paz," this locality not identified.—R. IX-V, fr.
I-onward.
Mimosa fiebrigii has the foliage and in particular the pubescence, composed of erect plain hairs and sessile spherical, brilliantly translucent golden glands, of M. gemmulata and its immediate allies, all native far to the east of Paraguay and collectively different in their infforescence of loose amentiform spikes.
The dense ellipsoid capitula of M. fiebrigii recall sympatric Paraguayan M. rojasii, but this has striately several-nerved fforal bracts and stipules characteristic of a distantly related group.
The also Paraguayan M. uliginosa and M. glanduliseta have broadly comparable capitula, but differ in armature of the stems, pinshaped glandular setulae and the dilated paraphyllidia of ser. Stipellares.
Despite its condensed ellipsoid capitula, M. fiebrigii is referred with confidence to ser. Leiocarpae.
2mm. nothopbeirt/s RG.
6.
Mimosa coruscocaesia Bameby (A-C) and M. nothopteris Bameby (D-F).
A. Leaf B. Leaflet, ventral (left) and dorsal (right) views.
C. Flower (aU from Martius s.n.,
the holotypus).
D. Flowering branchlet.
E. Leaflet, ventral (right) and dorsal (left) views.
F. Bract + flower. (AU from Lewis 1074.) Before I had become familiar with genuine M. fiebrigii I precipitately annotated ^«/5zY5 2446 (S) as a new species.
84.
Mimosa coruscocaesia Bameby, Brittonia 37: 128, fig. 2A-C. 1985.-"BrazU.
Bahia: Caitete, Martius s.n. sub nom. ined. "
M. cinerascens Mart. "
—Holotypus, M!; isotypus, G! = NY Neg. 11832.
Fig.
6 (A-C).
M. cylindracea sensu Bentham, 1876: 354, ex parte, quoad pi. Martius. bahiensem.
Densely leafy unarmed microphyllidious shrubs or subshrubs attaining 1.7 m, resembling and related to M. gemmulata but notably different in indumentum, the homotinous stems and If-axes densely clad in erect, arborescently villosulous setae or setulae to 0.35-1.8 mm mixed with shorter gray pubemlence, the narrow thick-textured lfts densely gray-tomentulose above, beneath both pubemlent and charged overall with crowded sessile, brilliantly topaz-colored glands ±0.1 mm diam., submarginally ciliate with contracted, hence substellate setulae, the long narrow amentiform ff-spikes axillary to coevally expanding lvs, not or scarcely exserted from foliage. iS^/pw/es lance-subulate recurved 1.5-2 x 0.4-0.6 mm, puberulent on both faces, persistent.
Leafstalks of major lvs 4-12 cm, the petiole ±6-10 mm, the ventral groove bridged between pinnae and there charged with a short ascending spicule, the longer interpinnal segments 5-11 mm; pinnae 7-12-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer pinnae 2-4.5 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments ±2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 17- 32-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.2-0.4 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.5 mm, the blades linear obtuse from scarcely asymmetric base, the longer ones 5.5-7.5 X 1,5 mm, 3.7-5 times as long as wide, extemally veinless on both faces.
Spikes including short peduncle 5-7 cm, without filaments 3.5-4.5 mm diam.; bracts linear-spatulate ±0.7 mm, caducous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.9-1.6 mm, thinly pubemlent extemally, the broadly deltate teeth shorter than or nearly as long as tube; corollas broadly turbinate-campanulate 2.3-2.7 mm, extemally pubemlent like calyx, the ovate 1-nerved, almost plane lobes 1.1- 1.5 X 0.9-1 mm, redor golden-glandular dorsally; filaments pink (fading brownish), free to base, exserted 4.5-5 mm; ovary pilosulous.
Pod sessile, in profile broad-linear 22-30 x 7 mm, 4-6-seeded, the replum ± 1 mm wide, like the stiffly papery valves at once setulose, pubemlent and gland-sprinkled overall, the valves breaking into individually dehiscent articles 4-4.5 mm long; seeds in broad view 4 x 3 .
5 mm, the smooth lustrous testa livid-streaked, the pleurogram ±2.5 X 2 mm.
In cerrado, attaining 760 m; described from a plant collected by C. F. P. von Martius, supposedly in October, 1818, near Caitete, close to the Atlantic-Sao Francisco divide at ±14°S in s.- centr. Bahia, but known precisely in modem times only from the vaUey of rio Carinhanha, on the Bahia-Minas Gerais border at ±45°45'W.-R. VII-IX(?X).
Mimosa coruscocaesia seems to be a specialized derivative of M. gemmulata, remarkable in ser. Leiocarpae for plumose and substellate setules.
Because of these trichomes, Bentham misidentified the type-collection as M. (ser. Lepidotae) cylindracea, which is eglandular and has yellow, haplostemonous ffowers.
The ffower of M. coruscocaesia is diplostemonous and the filaments, of an indeterminable color in the type, are now known to be pink.
The plumulose setules that clothe the stems and leaf-stalks of M. coruscocaesia are of a rusty-brown or yellowish hue that contrasts with the soft dove-gray tomentulose indumentum of the leaffets' upper face.
The epithet refers to the contrast between the bluegray upper and the gland-encrusted lower faces of the leaffets.
Rediscovery of M. coruscocaesia at 760 m elevation in transfranciscan Minas Gerais, and not on Chapada Diamantina from which the type was reported by Martius, raises a question about the accuracy of Martius's label.
The field data that appear on some Martius collections are known to be either vague or actually misleading.
The species is reported (1989) by Pereira Neto to be common along rio Carinhanha near 45°45'W, and therefore must have lain in the path of Spix and Martius on their journey from Malhada on the Sao Francisco west to Chapada do Parana in September of 1818.
Until its occurrence in south-central Bahia is confirmed, M. coruscocaesia may be considered probably endemic to the Carinhanha valley along the common border of Bahia and northwestern Minas Gerais.
85.
Mimosa verrucosa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 390.
1841.-"Oeiras, Prov. Piauhy, Gardner, n. 2136; Prov. Bahia [Itabira, ace. some labels], Blanchet, n. 2869."—Lectotypus, Gardner 2136, collected IV. 1839 (ff), K (hb. Hook.)! = IPA Neg. 7270; isotypi, BM! G! GH! NY! P! US! W!; syntypi, Blanchet 2869, F! = F Neg. 54872, G! K! = NY Neg. 1853, M! MO! NY! W! M. verrucosa sensu Bentham, 1875: 412; 1976: 355; Lewis, 1987, fig. 8H. Unarmed several-stemmed shrubs and bushy treelets 2.5^.5 m, gray-pubescent throughout with short simple hairs, and the stems, If-axes, peduncles and major veins of lfts' lower face charged with densely pubescent verruciform setulae 0.1-0.5 mm diam., the plane lfts equally gray-tomentulose on both faces or sometimes only thinly so above, beneath charged between veins with superficial or impressed, globose yellow or orange glands ±0.5 mm diam., the pliantly amentiform ff-spikes either all solitary or all fasciculate by 2-4 in axils of coevally expanding lvs, or some forming a shortly exserted efoliate pseudoraceme.
Stipules firm, erect incurved, lance-attenuate 3-7 mm, at dilated, dorsally convex base 1-2 mm wide, pubescent within and without, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 4-9.5 cm, the petiole 6-18(-21) x 0.7-1.4 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-15 mm, the ventral groove intermpted between pairs of pinnae by a conicsubulate pubemlent spicule 0.6-1.3 mm; pinnae 6-9(-10)-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.8-1.3 mm distant from refracted subulate paraphyllidia 0.4-1.2 mm, the blades of all obliquely oblong from semicordate base, obtuse or minutely apiculate, those at midrachis (3-)4-10(-12) X (1.5-)2-4.5mm,(2-)2.2- 3(-3.3) times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath prominulously 3-nerved from pulvinule, the straight midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the inner posterior nerve produced well beyond mid-blade, the outer one short incurved.
Axis of flower-spikes including short peduncle 6- 14.5 cm; bracts linear-oblanceolate 0.7-1.2 mm, dorsally pubemlent, caducous; y/ovv^r^ 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual, the obtusely obovoid ff-buds densely whitish-tomentulose with short simple hairs intermixed with minute glands, the calyx and tips of corolla-lobes exceptionally partly stellate-verruculose; calyx broadly campanulate 0.9-1.5(-1.8) mm, the deltate or depressed-deltate teeth 0.2-0.5 mm; corolla 2.5- 3.3 mm, the nearly erect lobes ovate or lanceovate 1.1-1.3 X 0.6-1.1 mm; filaments bright pink, free to base, exserted 5-7.5 mm; ovary tomentulose.
Pods (few seen) broadly linear planocompressed, cuneately contracted at base into a stipe 2-3 mm, the body when weU fertilized 30- 45 X ±8 mm, 4-6-seeded, the undulately constricted replum ±0.7 mm wide, the replum and papery valves alike densely grayor sordid-tomentulose with short simple hairs mixed on valves with minute scattered glands and on replum with stellate scales, the ripe valves breaking into free-faUing articles 5.5-9 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In caatinga woodland, disturbed carrasco thickets, and cerrado, 100-820 m, locally plentiful in middle e. BrazU in ±3°-14°S, 40°-46°W, from the Balsas-Pamaiba divide in s. Maranhao e. across n. and centr. Piaui to s.-w. Ceara (Chapada do Araripe), s. to lower S. Francisco valley in extreme w. Pernambuco, n.-centr. and w. Bahia, and extreme e.-centr. Goias; naturalized or planted for ornament in BrasUia, D. F.—R. IIV, VII-VIII, the fuU term not known.—Jurema preta, applied also to M. ophthalmocentra.
Map 14.
A bushy treelet of rapid growth, ornamental in ffower, the long pliant tassels of pink filaments forming a pleasing contrast with the gray foliage.
In the material examined there is considerable variation in size of leaves and leaffets.
The larger leaffets are commonly about 5-7.5 x 2-3.5 mm, but can attain 9-12 x 4-4.5 mm, a variation probably due to conditions of shade or moisture.
Over most of its range the calyx of M. verrucosa is pubescent with simple hairs, but one collection from Chapada do Araripe in Ceara (Castellanos & Duarte 533, BRADE, NY) has a stellately lepidote calyx and a few stellae on the tip of the corolla-lobes.
This may possibly represent an independent taxonomic unit.
86.
Mimosa schomburgkii Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 2: 133.
1840.-"Pirara, British Guiana.
Schomburgk, n. 715."—Holotypus, K. (hb. Benth.)! =NY Neg. 1854; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 7i77, F (3 sheets)! = F Negs.
54862-4, G! US (715bis)l W! M. schomburgkii sensu Bentham, 1841: 390, 1875:412, 1876: 355 (obs.); Record, Trop.
Woods 11:24.
1927; Britton & Rose, 1928: 158; Ducke, 1949: 56, 1958: 50; Heringer & Paula, Anais Soc. Bot. Brasil Congr.
Nac. Bot. 30: 76-81 (passim), fig. 11.
1979.
Broad-crowned, amply microphyllidious trees (3-)5-12(-15) m with tmnk 7-40 cm diam., the ffowering branches unarmed but the sterile ones (Ducke, 1958, I.e.) said to be prickly, the defoliate annotinous and older branches glabrescent atrocastaneous lenticellate but the homotinous ones, lf-stks and axes of infforescence rusty-scabroustomentulose with either short-stalked or sessile medusiform setae, the resinously aromatic foliage bicolored, the lfts above brown-olivaceous sublustrous, finely remotely steUate, pubemlent or sometimes glabrous, beneath sparsely charged with pale yeUow or whitish globose glands ±0.1 9 0 MAP 14.
Central and tropical South America.
Ranges of M schomburgkii Bentham, M. trianae Bentham, M. verrucosa Bentham, and M. artemisiana Heringer & Paula. mm diam. and, especially along midrib, scattered medusiform setulae, the terminal efoliate or proximally leafy-bracteate panicle of narrow amentiform ff-spikes exserted up to 1-3 dm from foliage.
Stipules erect linear-attenuate or subulate 2-8 X 0.4-0.9 mm, the involute blade densely stellate dorsally, early dry deciduous.
Leaf-stalks (6-)8-15 cm, the petiole including elongated pulvinus 12-22 mm, at middle 0.8- 1.5 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments (6-)7-12 mm, the ventral groove continuous between pinnae (spicules 0); pinnae 7-13(-l 5)-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones (4.5_)5_8.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments (1.4-) 1.8-3.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20-26-jug., decrescent near base of rachis and also upward from a point near or below middle, the small first pair directly next to subulate, densely tomentulose paraphyllidia 0.3-0.7(-l) mm, the ventrally convex blades narrowly oblong or lance-oblong from obtusely auriculate base, those near midrachis 5-10.5 X (1.5-)1.8-3.2 mm, 2.8-3.8 times as long as wide, all 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the slender subcentric, dorsally prominulous midrib either simple or commonly weakly 3-5- branched on each side, the weak inner posterior nerve expiring either below or near mid-blade, the outer one very short, often scarcely discernible beneath.
Spikes mostly fasciculate by 2-4, densely many ffd, without filaments 4-5 mm diam., the axis including very short peduncle (3.5-)4-9(-10.5) cm; bracts linear-oblanceolate 0.7-1.3 X 0.2-0.4 mm, stellulate dorsally beyond middle, caducous from beneath the obovoid obtuse ff-buds; flowers either all 4- or (in same spike) 4-5-merous, all diplostemonous, the calyx and corolla alike densely silky-tomentulose overall with cream-colored intermeshed stellulae; calyx campanulate 0.9-1.2 mm, nearly as broad, the widely low-deltate teeth 0.1-0.25 mm; corolla 2-2.5 mm, the erect ovate, ventrally convex glabrous brownish lobes 0.8-1.2 x 0.5-0.9 mm, the fifth lobe when present sometimes partly fused with either one or both of its neighbors; filaments white or cream-white, the longer set exserted 3-5 mm.
Pods in profile oblong or broad linear (2-)2.5-6.5 x 0.6-0.85(-l) cm, (3-)4-12- seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 2-6 mm, the shallowly constricted replum 0.5-0.6 mm wide, the papery, scarcely convex valves densely minutely stellulate-lepidote overall, when ripe breaking into free-falling indehiscent articles 5- 7 mm long; seeds (few seen) lenticular, almost round in broad view, ±3.5 mm diam., the smooth testa fuscous-olivaceous.
In riverine forest overhanging the water, at margin of gallery forest, and in bushor treeislands in seasonally wet savanna, below 300 m, discontinuously dispersed in the lower Orinoco valley and around the e. and s.-e. periphery of Guayana Highland, from Guarico and Monagas in Venezuela s. to n. Roraima in Brazil, e. shortly into adj. Guyana; distantly disjunct on the Caribbean coastal plain in Honduras and n.-e. Nicaragua, and (subject to confirmation by fieldstudy) near Tapera in Pernambuco, Brazil; cultivated and locally naturalized near Manaus in Amazonas, Brazil, cultivated at Belem in Para, at BrasUia, and in Rio de Janeiro.—R. in S. America X-lV(-Vl).—Mulato (Venezuela); jurema (Roraima).
Map 14.
An elegant tree with finely divided aromatic foliage and ample panicles of white ffowers, M. schomburgkii is, in South America north of the Hylaea, the only mimosa—other than allopatric (Colombian) M. trianae—with ffowers at once spicate and densely stellate.
A full account of its relationship to closely related M. artemisiana is given by Heringer & Paula in the protologue of the latter.
The Honduran plant has long been accepted as typical M. schomburgkii, and was thought by Record to be native there.
The identity of the populations in Pemambuco is somewhat ambiguous.
These have the relatively small ffowers of genuine M. schomburgkii, but leaffets with the relatively long basal auricle that characterize herbarium specimens of M artemisiana.
Field study and analysis of wood-stmcture in the light of data secured by Heringer & Paula are required to settle the taxonomy.
87.
Mimosa artemisiana Heringer & Paula, Anais Soc. Bot. Brasil Congr.
Nac. Bot. 30: (Campo Grande): 75, figs. 1, 3-7.
1919.-''E. P. Heringer 15506 .
.
.
5.
V.1975.
Crescit sponte in [Coronel Pacheco] status Minas Gerais .
.
. in hortis culta ad Universita Brasiliensae.
.
. ."—Holotypus, IBGE, not seen; isotypi, K! NY! UB! US! Amply leafy unarmed trees 12-25 m with trunk 2.5-5 dm diam. and rough fissured pale yellow bark 4 mm thick, the homotinous branchlets together with all Ifand infforescence-axes brownish-tomentellous with stellate trichomes, the thintextured olivaceous, when dry brownish lfts minutely thinly pubemlent above with mostly simple (or scattered few-branched) villi, beneath a triffe paler and sprinkled with golden glands ±0.1 mm diam., the midrib charged with stellate scales like those of stem, the lateral and terminal pseudoracemes or amply branched panicles of pliantly amentiform ff-spikes either efoliate or few-leaved at base only, commonly well exserted from foliage.
Stipules linear-attenuate incurvedascending, attaining 8-10 x 1 mm, caducous (consequently little known).
Leaf-stalks 8-19 cm, the petiole including elongate pulvinus 2-3 cm, at middle 1-2 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 9-14 mm, the ventral groove continuous between pinna-pairs (spicules 0); pinnae 1- 1 l(-12)-jug., decrescent proximally, the axis of distal ones 7-12.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments (2-)3-4.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 26-33-jug., a little decrescent at both ends of rachis, the first pair 0.5-0.8 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.4-0.9 mm, the blades subsigmoidally oblong, obtuse-mucronulate or deltately subacute, at base auriculate on posterior side, those near mid-rachis 7.5-11 x 2-3(-"5") mm, 3-4.2 times as long as wide, almost veinless above, beneath carinate by the slender prominulous subcentric, pinnately branched costa, one posterior nerve from pulvinule produced nearly to mid-blade.
Flower-spikes mostly 2-4 per node of panicle, without filaments 6-8 mm diam., the axis including very short peduncle 5-12.5 cm, the ff-buds narrowly obovoid obtuse, densely ochroleucous-stellulate; bracts linear-oblanceolate 0.7-1.3 mm, stellate-tomentulose dorsally, 1991] B A R N E B Y : SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 159 caducous before anthesis; flowers 4(-"5")-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx campanulate 1-1.5 mm, densely stellate-tomentulose extemally, the depressed-deltate teeth 0.15-0.2 mm; corolla narrowly campanulate 2.8-4.1 mm, the erect ovate 1 -nerved lobes 0.7-1.3 x 0.6-0.8 mm; filaments white, free to base, the longer ones exserted 3.3-4.2 mm; ovary commonly puberulent, sessile.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 8G) sessile linearoblong to 8 X 1 cm and ±7-8-seeded, the valves ferrugineous-stellate-tomentulose, dehiscent as in M. schomburgkii.
In moist forest, sometimes in varzea, mostly below 500 m, scattered along the Atlantic slope of BrazU in lat. 16°-22°30'S, from the lower Jequitinhonha valley in s.-e. Bahia s.-w. through the basins of rios Mucuri and Doce to the s. slope of Sa. da Mantequeira in s.-e. Minas Gerais and Sa. do Cambori in Rio de Janeiro; cultivated in Brasilia and Rio de Janeiro.—R. IV-VI. —Anjico bravo; monjoleiro.
Map 14.
This is a handsome tree of rapid growth, with ample panicles of white, honey-scented ffowers.
In the protologue it was distinguished from distantly vicariant but morphologically similar M. schomburgkii, grown side by side with it over a period of twelve years under cerrado conditions at Brasilia, principally by features ofpetioleand wood-anatomy, but the longer corollas and longer basal auricle of the leaffets are more readily accessible differential characters.
Kuhlmann (s.n.,
RB) noted that the bruised foliage of Af. schomburgkii cultivated at Rio de Janeiro was resinously scented, a fact noted also by Ducke (1222, NY) at Manaus, whereas that of M. artemisiana was scentless.
In material studied I could not find any pentamerous ffowers as indicated in the protologue of M. artemisiana; I think they must occur only sporadically in this species, as they do in M. schomburgkii.
The epithet artemisiana commemorates Dra.
Maria Artemisia Arraes Hermans.
88.
Mimosa trianae Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 412.
1875.—"Villavicencio, New Granada [Colombia], Triana."
—Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1929; isotypi, P! W!; probable isotypus, Triana 6834, COL! M. trianae sensu Britton & Killip, 1936: 152.
Trees attaining 10 m, so far as known unarmed, the young stems, If-axes and branches of the ample exserted terminal panicle of loose amentiform fl-spikes densely sordid-tomentulose overall with very short many-rayed stelliform setulae, the ample foliage notably bicolored, the lfts when dry convex, dark lustrous brown, minutely pubemlent and finely remotely setulose above, beneath convex, densely tomentulose with pallid overlapping stellulae mixed with spherical golden glands ±0.1 mm diam., the whitish or cream-colored ffs likewise densely stellulate overall.
Stipules lanceolate obtuse 1-2 mm, becoming dry fragile.
Leaf-stalks 9-16 cm, the petiole with hard pulvinus ±10-15 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-7 mm, the ventral sulcus continuous, spicules 0; pinnae of longer lvs 12-20-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the axis of longer ones 4-6.5(-7) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 15-23 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 25-37-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair close to linear paraphyllidia to 0.8 mm, the blades including the triangular basal auricle 0.5-1 mm lance-oblong, slightly arched forward distally, the longer ones 3.5-5.5 x 1-2 mm, 2.5-3.7 times as long as wide, the subcentric midrib shallowly depressed above, strongly prominulous beneath, other venulation concealed by vesture.
Panicles pyramidal 12-30 cm; spikes mostly fasciculate by 2-3, loosely manyffd, without filaments 3.5-4 mm diam., the axis including very short peduncle 5-9 cm; bracts ±0.5 mm caducous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, all bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.7-0.9 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth scarcely 0.1 mm; corolla ±2 mm, the ovate obtuse, shallowly concave lobes 0.9-1 X 0.6-0.7 mm; filaments whitish, obscurely united at very base, exserted 4 mm.
Pods several per spike, randomly spreading-ascending, in profile linear, straight or gently decurved, 30-38 X 6-7 mm, 5-8-seeded, cuneately contracted at base into a stipe as long as corolla, the shallowly constricted replum ±0.5 mm wide, the valves scarcely elevated over seeds, the replum and valves alike densely yellowish-stellatetomentulose overall, the valves when ripe breaking up into free-faUing articles 5-7 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In unknown habitats, but to be expected in brush-woodland along streams at ±500-800(-?) m, encountered only in foothill valleys near e. base of Cordillera Oriental in lat. 4°10'-20'N in Cundinamarca and adj. Meta, Columbia. —Yopo, fumishing an hallucinogenic snuff" like Anadenanthera.
Map 14.
Mimosa trianae is very closely related to M. schomburgkii, differing most obviously in the densely tomentulose lower face of the leaffets, less decisively so in slightly higher leaf-formula and somewhat smaller leaffets.
The ffowers and fmit are essentially identical and the two species might perhaps be better treated as geographical varieties of one.
The Venezuelan report (Pittier, 1927: 68) from the state of Lara is based on a collection (Jahn 1193, US) ofM. gemmulata var. segrex.
B(vii).
Series BIMUCRONATAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Bimucronatae Barneby, ser. nov., foliomm formula variabili et fforibus nunc 3- nunc 4-meris difficile verbis paucis exactis ab afl[inibus separanda, ubi tetramerae a ser. Leiocarpis, caeterius similibus et forsan proximis, fforibus capitellatis (nec spicatis) diversae, ubi trimerae a ser. Ceratoniis pinnamm distaUum foliolis numerosis (10- 48-, nec 1-6-jugis) parvis (3-10, nec 10-30 mm usque longis) distantiores.—Sp. typica: M. bimucronata (DeCandolle) Bentham.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Rubicaules sensu Bentham, 1875: 423, minima ex parte (sp. no. 188).
M. XXVIII.
Bimucronatae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 145, in clave.
1928, nom. nud. Shrubs and trees 2-8(-10) m, mostly freestanding but subsarmentose when crowded, armed on some intemodes with 1-3 infrastipular or infrapetiolar aculei (random branches unarmed).
Indumentum of minute plain hairs, granular-claviform trichomes, and in M. lewisii some gland-tipped setae or subsessile glands, nowhere simply setose.
Stipules usually lance-subulate or linear 1-nerved, sometimes ovate-acuminate to 5-nerved.
Leaf-formula ii-xiv (-xvi)/ (8_)l0-48, the larger lfts (2.5-)3-10 mm; interpinnal spicules present or not.
Inflorescence most often an efoliate pseudoraceme or panicle or globose (hemispherical, in some M. paraibana oblong) capitula, but the capitula sometimes largely axillary or becoming so; flowers either 3- or 4-merous; calyx 0.45-1.3 (in M. lewisii 1.3-3.4) mm, either denticulate or subtmncate; corolla 1.8-3.1 (in M. lewisii 4.5-5.5) mm; filaments white or (M. paraibana) pink, free or nearly so.
Fruit a craspedium, either sessile or shortly stipitate, mostly (4.5-)5-l 1(-14) mm, in M. paraibana 17-24 mm wide, 6-10-(in M. lewisii to 15-)seeded, the valves mostly stiff-papery, in M. hexandra suberously thickened.—Spp. 10, primarily of tropical e. Brazil, M. bimucronata extending s. into warm-temperate S. America and cultivated, sometimes naturalized elsewhere in the tropics ofboth hemispheres, M. catharinensis in Atlantic s. Brazil, M. hexandra intermptedly dispersed from s. Mexico to Paraguay and n.-e. Argentina, one local in equatorial Andes.
The nucleus of ser. Bimucronatae consists of homonymous M. bimucronata with M. pseudosepiaria, M. exalbescens and M. hexandra, an essentially homogeneous group except for the inconvenient fact that the first pair have, with random irregularities, tetramerous ffowers and the second pair trimerous ones.
The tetramerous species differ from some members of ser. Leiocarpae only in capitate, not spicate partial infforescences, and may well be derived from that group.
The trimerous ones closely approach ser. Ceratoniae, except for the narrow craspedia as opposed to broad valvate pods.
The only one of these known in 1875, M. bimucronata (=M. sepiaria Bentham), appeared in Bentham's monograph in an incongruous set of Rubicaules, associated with the distantly related M. (ser. Habbasia) berlandieri (a synonym ofM. asperata Linnaeus) and M. (ser. Glandulosae) inamoena Bentham.
There is thus no previously defined series to which any of the Bimucronatae could be referred.
Four species described in recent years are here associated with M. bimucronata, although each differs in some substantial feature from the prototype of the series.
Mimosa lewisii, like M. bimucronata in general habit and armature, is anomalous in the series by its partly glandular indumentum, exceptionally long ffowers arranged in hemispherical or turbinate (not globose) capitula, and relatively short and stout filaments; it may perhaps deserve segregation as a monotypic series.
Mimosa paraibana, M. cubatanensis and M. catharinensis differ from M. bimucronata in relatively few and broad leaffets.
The first is unique in the series because of pink filaments and perhaps also for its very wide pod which resembles that of ser. Ceratoniae at early maturity but finally breaks up into free-faUing articles.
The fmits of M. cubatanensis and M. catharinensis are still undescribed.
Apparently similar to the last three is a Paraguayan tree known ^^^U BARNEBY: SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 161 only from one fruiting collection, described betechnically inseparable from Bimucronatae, may low as Mimosa no. 98.
The Andean M. caduca, be more nearly akin to ser. Andinae.
Conspectus of ser. Bimucronatae Mimosa * Capitula globose; fls 4-merous, the corolla ±2-3 mm, the filaments whitish; lfts of longer pinnae mostly over 20-jug. (except M. bimucronata var. adenocarpa); pod 4.5-9 mm wide, 5-9-seeded; gland-tipped setulae none.
89. bimucronata (DeCandolle) O. Kuntze a. var. bimucronata b. var. adenocarpa Hassler 90. pseudosepiaria Harms ** As *, but fls 3-merous; lfts to 8-30-jug.; pod 8-11 mm wide.
91. exalbescens Bameby 92. hexandra M. Micheli *** As *, but capitula hemispherical; corolla 4.5-5.5 mm; pod 9-15-seeded; gland-tipped setulae present.
93. lewisii Bameby **** As *, but lfts less than 20-jug., filaments pink, and pod 17-23 mm wide; n.-e. BrazU.
94. paraibana Bameby 4c«««« ^g «*«« |j^^ filaments white; pod unknown; s.-e. Brazil.
95. cubatanensis Hoehne 96. catharinensis Burkart *««*«* ^g ****^ i^^i filaments probably whitish; pod 5.5-8 mm wide; s. Andean Ecuador and adj. Peru.
97. caduca (Willdenow) Poiret Affinity unknown.
98. troncosoae Fortunato & Bameby Key to species of ser. Bimucronatae^ 1.
Rs predominantly 4-merous (random 3-merous fls at base of some capitula and random 5-merous ones distally).
2.
Lfts of longer pinnae either 20+ pairs, or the larger lfts less than 2 mm wide, or both.
3.
Calyx 1.3-3.4 mm and corolla 4.5-5.5 mm; filaments stout, only twice as long as corolla; capitula hemispherical, the lowest fls horizontal or widely ascending; pod 9-13 cm long, 9-15-seeded; centr. and n.-e. Bahia, Brazil 93.
M. lewisii (p. 169).
3.
Calyx 0.5-1.3 mm and corolla 1.9-3.1 mm; filaments slender, the longer set 2.5-3 times as long as corolla; capitula subglobose, the lower fls declined; pod 3.5-6(-7) cm long, 5-9-seeded; widely dispersed.
4.
Inflorescence amply paniculate, commonly exserted 1.5—4 dm above lvs; rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-7 cm and their lfts usually 24-32-jug.; midrib of lfts somewhat displaced from center and 1-3-branched on each side; widespread over e. Brazil and cultivated or adventive elsewhere 89.
M. bimucronata (p. 162).
4.
Inflorescence simple or few-branched, exserted 1.5 dm or less from lvs; rachis of longer pinnae ±1.5-2.5 cm and their lfts to 15-23-jug.; midrib of lfts subcentric and simple; local in n. Bahia and w. Pemambuco 90.
M pseudosepiaria (p. 165).
2.
Lfts of longer pinnae 8-17 pairs and the larger ones 2-4.5(-6) mm wide.
5.
Plants of e. Paraguay; var. adenocarpa of: 89.
M bimucronata (p. 162). ' NOTE.
Mimosa troncosoae Fortunato & Bameby cannot be introduced effectively into the foregoing key until the flower is known.
If this proves to be tetramerous, the species will be most nearly conformable with M. catharinensis, but differing in non-sarmentose, arborescent stature and (so far as known) unarmed branches.
If the flower proves to be trimerous, the species will be compared with sympatric M. hexandra, from which it is already securely differentiated by large leaflets and papery-walled craspedium.
5.
Plants of eastem Brazil s.-ward from Maranhao and Pemambuco, and one Andean.
6.
Filaments pink; n.-e. Brazil (Maranhao to Ceara and Pemambuco); cauline aculei scattered recurved; pod 17-23 mm wide 94.
M paraibana (p. 171).
6.
Filaments white; s.-e. Brazil (Minas Gerais to Sta. Catarina); one localized in s. Andean Ecuador and adj. Pem.
7.
Of s. Ecuador and adj. Peru; lfts revolute, lustrous above, whitish beneath 91.
M. caduca (p. 173).
7.
Of Atlantic Brazil; lfts plane, bicolored but dull above, paler but not whitish beneath.
8.
Free-standing trees of disturbed woodlands inland from the immediate coast, the stems armed with immediately infrastipular, subhorizontal or acroscopic aculei; lfts of longer pinnae 11-17-jug.; Atlantic slope from Minas Gerais to e. Parana, apparently cultivated in Distrito Federal 95.
M. cubatanensis (p. 171).
8.
Sarmentose in restinga, the stems armed with scattered recurved aculei; lfts of longer pinnae 6-9-jug.; known only from coastal Sta. Catarina. .. 96.
M. catharinensis (p. 172).
1.
Rs predominantly 3-merous (exceptional irregularities in some capitula).
9.
Pod when fully developed 6-7.5 cm long, the sublustrous, stiffly chartaceous valves not over 0.3 mm thick; e. Brazil (s.-e. Maranhao to n.-w. Minas Gerais) 91.
M. exalbescens (p. 165).
9.
Pod when fully developed 3-5(-6) cm long, the suberous, dull brown valves to 0.5-0.7 mm thick; discontinuously widespread from s. Mexico to e. Brazil and Argentina 92.
M. hexandra (p. 166).
89.
Mimosa bimucronata (DeCandolle) O. Kuntze, Revis. gen. pL 1: 198.
1891.-Typus infra sub var. bimucronata indicatur.
Trees and bushy treelets (2-)3-8(-10) m, armed along new leafy branches and on random lf-stks with stout intemodal aculei l-8(-10) mm, but the purplish-brown ffowering branchlets and their lf-stks usually unarmed or nearly so, the new stems with lf-stks (especially ventrally) and axes of exserted paniculate infforescence densely or quite thinly puberulent with erect-ascending sordid or yellowish hairs to 0.2-0.4 mm mixed with few or many livid granules, the firm plane concolorous lfts olivaceous and moderately lustrous on both faces, often minutely ciliolate, the widely branched panicle of small white capitula leaffess or almost so, exserted (1-) 1.5-4 dm from foliage.
Stipules firm erect-incurved, narrowly or broadly lanceolate 2-5 x 0.7-1.3 mm, concave ventrally, pubescent within and without, persistent.
Leafstalks 4-9(-l 1) cm, the petiole including elongate livid pulvinus 7-24(-30) x 0.8-1.4 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 7-16 mm, the deep ventral groove interrupted between pinna-pairs by a pubescent bridge sometimes surmounted by a conic or subulate spicule; pinnae (3-)5-9(-10)- jug., a little decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 3.5-6.5(-7) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (1.2-) 1.4-2.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (16-)24-32-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 1-1.8 mm distant from reffexed subulate pubescent paraphyllidia, the blades linear or Unear-oblong from obUquely dilated base, acute or apiculate at apex, straight or slightly arched forward, the longer ones 6.5- 10(-14) X l.l-2.3(-4.5) mm, aU veinless above, the dorsaUy prominulous costa dividing blade ±1:2 and giving rise on each side to 1-3 weak secondary venules.
Peduncles l-3(-5) per node of infforescence, 6-16(-20) mm; capitula globose, without filaments (4.5-)5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse ff-buds glabrous or minutely papillate; bracts obovatecuneate or spatulate 0.4-0.7 mm; flowers white fragrant 4(randomly 5)-merous diplostemonous, the pistil of some lower ones often rudimentary; calyx campanulate 0.55-0.9 mm, the sometimes obscure teeth 0.05-0.15 mm; coroUa vase-shaped 2-2.8 mm, the ovate 1 -nerved, nearly plane lobes 0.8-1.1 X 0.6-0.8 mm, sometimes minutely papillate around margin distally; filaments white, free, exserted 4.5-6 mm; ovary usually glabrous, sometimes minutely resinous-papillate.
Pods 1- 5 per capitulum, in profile broadly linear, straight or gently decurved, planocompressed, the body when weU fertilized 35-60(-70) x 5.5-7.5 (teste Burkart, 1948, -9) mm, at base cuneately contracted into a stipe 1.5-5 mm, the replum almost straight (except where ovules abort), 0.5-0.6 mm diam., the papery reddish-brown, finally nigrescent, glabrous but sometimes granular valves scarcely elevated over seeds, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into (4-)5-8(- 9) transversely oblong or almost square articles 5-7 mm long; seeds rhombic-elliptic in wide profile, 3.7-5.5 X 3-4 mm, strongly compressed, the testa dull fawn-olivaceous girdled by fuscous margin.
In its Brazilian range the weU-known M. bi- 1991] B A R N E B Y : SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 163 mucronata varies little.
Some herbarium specimens, due to the size of the infforescence, include only depauperate leaves at or near base of the panicle, which may give a misleading picture of the potential leaf-formula.
Others show only unarmed branchlets, but aculei are believed to be regularly present on some part of the plant.
The status of the Paraguayan var. adenocarpa, in which the lfts appear at once fewer and much wider, remains uncertain, but it is provisionally retained here in order to stimulate further studies.
Burkart interpreted var. adenocarpa (in annotation of Fiebrig 4770, P) as equivalent to M. hexandra, but its ffowers are tetramerous and the immature pod shows no sign of suberous thickening.
The abundant, sweetly fragrant white ffowers of M. bimucronata are a source of honey, and its hard wood is used in carpentry and cabinet-work.
Its long-established use in southeastern Brazil as a hedge is acknowledged in Bentham's epithet sepiaria.
It is used in folk-medicine (Pio Correa, 1931) to treat asthma and intermittent fevers.
Key to varieties of M. bimucronata 1.
Lf-formula of larger lvs v-ix(-x)/22-32; longer lfts 6.5-10(-ll) X 1-2.3 mm; range of the species 89a. var. bimucronata (p. 163).
1.
Lf-formula of larger lvs iii-v/16-22; longer lfts 7-14 X 2-4(-4.5) mm; local in e. Paraguay. .. 89b. var. adenocarpa (p. 163).
89a. Mimosa bimucronata (DeCandolle) O. Kuntze var. bimucronata.
M. bimucronata O. Kuntze, 1891, I.e., based on Acacia bimucronata DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 469.
1825.-"In BrasiUa (Raddi .
.
. v.s. in h. Moricand.)."
— Holotypus, labeUed: "du BresU, herb, du musee de Florence.
C'est I'echantUlon qui a servi de type de Tespece."
, G!—The epithet refers, not to aculei, but to paraphyllidia.
M. sepiaria Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 395.
1842.- "... all over South Brazil to Rio de Janeiro, Tweedie, Sello, Lord Colchester, Guillemin, Pohl, etc.; Bahia, Salzmann; Pemambuco, Gardner, n. 979."—Lectotypus, Tweedie 72 ("used for hedges all over s. Brazil"), K! = NY Neg. 11666; syntypi, Colchester s.n.,
K! Gardner 979, G! K! NY! US! Guillemin 615, K! Pohl 1367, K! NY! W!,
1369, K! = NY Neg. 1870, NY! Salzmann s.n.,
K! Sello 346, Kl-M. bimucronata subsp. sepiaria (Bentham) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 2.
1910.-Equated with Acacia bimucronata DeCandolle by Bentham, 1875; 423, 1876: 364.
M. thyrsoides Grisebach, Fl.
Brit.
W. I. 219.
1860.- "Jamaica, W^w//5c/2/[^'^^/]."—Holotypus to be sought at GOET, not at K.—Equated with M. sepiaria by Bentham, 1875: 423, in nota.
M. stuhlmannii Harms, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 26: 254.
1899.—"Mossambik: Mussoril e Cabeceira (Rodrigues de Cavalho s.n.-1884-1885).-Festland (Stuhlmann CoU.
I. n. 276-Januar 1889)."-Syntypi, probably +B, no isosyntypi seen.—Recognized by Harms, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 30: 77.
1901, as M sepiaria adventive in Africa.
M. bimucronata subsp. sepiaria var. trichocarpa Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 2.
1910.—"ex icone Bentham. in Ror.
Bras.,
XV, 2, tab.
91 tantum nota."
—Holotypus, the plate cited! M. bimucronata sensu Burkart, 1948: 108, sequ.,
fig. 15B + antecedent bibliography; Adams, Flowering pi. Jamaica 339.1972; Cardenas de Guevara, Emstia 8: 1-6, figs. 1-3.
1982; Bernardi, Boissiera 35: 145.
1984; Lewis, 1987, pi. 8B,fig.8S. Characters as given in description of species and modified in key to varieties.
In low, often wet places along streams, around ponds, in seasonallyffooded brush-woodland, and along roadside ditches, becoming weedy in capoeira and in suburban waste places, in s. Brazil often planted for hedging, apparently primitively native along the Atlantic coastal plain and shore and in the adjoining foothills of e. Brazil from Alagoas to s. Rio Grande do Sul and especially common or locally dominant s. of the Tropic line, also disjunctly in the middle Paraguai and middle-lower Parana valleys in Paraguay and adj. Brazil and n.-e. Argentina, extending inland from the Brazilian coast to the lower S. Francisco valley in Bahia, to Distrito Federal (where cultivated and sparingly naturalized), to s.-centr. Minas Gerais (attaining 1500 m in s. Sa. do Espinha9o), and e. S. Paulo; long cultivated in Guyana and naturalized in the Orinoco valley (Barinas, Venezuela), on Jamaica, in Singapore, s.-e. China, and tropical Africa.—R. in S. America primarily I-III and fr.
III-VII, sporadically at other times.—Maricd; unha-de-gato; espinho; manicazeiro (Rio de Janeiro); silva (Parana); Brazil macca (Jamaica); diablito (Venezuela, in allusion to hardness of the wood).
Map 15.
89b. Mimosa bimucronata (DeCandolle) O. Kuntze var. adenocarpa Hassler.
M. bimucronata subsp. sepiaria var. adenocarpa Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 3.
1910. — "Paraguay: Caballero cue Flussufer.
.
.
Fiebrig MAP 15.
West Indies and South America.
Ranges of M. bimucronata (DeCandoUe) O. Kuntze var. bimucronata and M. paraibana Bameby. no. 4770 in Herb. Hassler... id no. 4081 fructif."
-Lectotypus, Fiebrig 4081, G!; syntypi, Fiebrig 4770, E! G! GH! L! M! P! = NY Neg. 11807.
Like var. bimucronata except as modified in key to varieties; clavate-granular trichomes more numerous than usual in var. bimucronata.
On streambanks and to be expected in wet thickets near or below 300 m, known only from n.-e. Paraguay near 22°30'S, to be sought in adj. Mato Grosso, BrazU.-H. (?-)II(-?).
90.
Mimosa pseudosepiaria Harms, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 42: 207.
1908.-"Bahia: Sumpfige Niederungen bei Remanso (ULE n. 7383—Jan. 1907)."-Holotypus, ^B = FNeg.
14281; clastotypus (fi-agm), F!; isotypi, G! HAMB! K! Microphyllidious bushy treelets 3-4 m, randomly armed below some nodes with solitary stout recurved broad-based infrapetiolar aculei to ±5-8 mm, the annotinous branchlets lividbrown, densely pallid-lenticellate, the young stems, lf-stks and peduncles minutely villosulous with fine hairs not over 0.1 mm mixed with scattered livid granules, the thin-textured olivaceous subconcolorous lfts either glabrous on both faces or subappressed-puberulent dorsally, the infforescence a succession of small few-ffd globose capitula axillary to and shorter than lvs going out into a leaffess, simple or few-branched pseudoraceme exserted not more than 5-15 cm from foliage.
Stipules linear-subulate 1.5-3 x 0.2-0.3 mm, puberulent dorsally, tardily deciduous.
Leafstalks (1.5-)2-5 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 3-10 mm, at middle 0.4-0.6 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 3.5-8(-l 1) mm, the ventral groove narrow, bridged between pinna-pairs, minutely spiculate or not; pinnae (4-) 5-9-jug., a little decrescent at proximal or at both ends of If-stk, the rachis of longer ones (12-)15- 25 mm, the interfoliolar segments up to 0.6-1.1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 15-23-jug., slightly decrescent at both ends of rachis, the first pair 0.4- 0.8 mm distant from small erect paraphyllidia, all in outUne linear obtuse or subacute, the longer ones 2.3-7.5 x 0.5-1.5 mm, ±4-6.5 times as long as wide, the posterior angle rounded at base, the filiform simple subcentric costa discolored beneath but not prominulous, the upper face veinless.
Peduncles soUtary or geminate very slender (3-)5-l 6 mm; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fforal axis not over 2 mm, the plumply obovoid ff-buds thinly minutely puberulent distally; flowers mostly 4(-5)-merous and bisexual, in some capitula some lower ones staminate 3-merous, all diplostemonous; calyx membranous campanulate 0.45-0.7 mm, extemally glabrous or microscopically puberulent, the broadly low-toothed rim minutely puberulent; corolla 1.9-2.7 mm, narrowly funnel-form, the ovate acute membranous 1-nerved lobes 1-1.2 x 0.6-0.8 mm; filaments white, free to base, exserted ±3.5-4 mm; ovary shortly stipitate pilosulous.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 8R) stipitate, the slender stipe (4-6.5 mm, the Unear-oblong planocompressed body 40-60 X 4.5-6 mm, cuneate or attenuate at either end, the shallowly undulate, ephemerally puberulent replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, the papery brownish sublustrous valves delicately venulose and minutely livid-granular, when ripe breaking up into (6-)7-9 free-falling articles ±4.5-6 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In caatinga thickets at low elevations, known only from the lower S. Francisco valley near 9°S in w. Pemambuco and adj. Bahia.—R. I-V. Mimosa pseudosepiaria, first collected near Joazeiro by Martius in 1819 but not described until long afterward, is a critical entity, closely akin to Mm. bimucronata, hexandra and exalbescens, all of which are known to occur in lowland Bahia, and especially to M. hexandra, which has been collected with it around Remanso and Petrolina.
It differs from M. bimucronata in the reduced foliage with fewer, simply costate and on the average smaller leaffets; from M. exalbescens by much narrower pods (4.5-6, not 8- 10 mm wide); from M. hexandra primarily in thin-textured craspedium; and from the two last collectively in mostly tetramerous, not trimerous ffowers.
However, in all members of the group some intraspecific variation in number of ffower parts has been observed, and I am perhaps overweighting the character in this context.
It seems certain, however, that the bisexual ffowers of M. bimucronata and M. pseudosepiaria are regularly tetramerous and only some smaUer staminate ones trimerous, whereas all are trimerous in M. hexandra and M. exalbescens.
91.
Mimosa exalbescens Bameby, Brittonia 37: 135, fig. 3A. 1985.-"BrazU.
Maranhao: Mun.
Loreto, Fazenda Morros, ±35 km S of Loreto, 300 m, 23 Mar 1962 (ff), G. & L. Eiten 3751.''- Holotypus, NY!; isotypi, K! UB!-Ibid.,
25 Aug 1963 (fr), G. & L. Eiten 5^09.-Paratypi, K! MO! NY! UB! Drought-deciduous shrubs and small bushy trees 2-4 m, resembling M. bimucronata but more prickly (aculei even on infforescence-axes) and the epidermis of annotinous stems early turning whitish, the young ffowering branchlets armed with either antrorsely or retrorsely curved aculei 0.5-0.6 mm, the paniculate infforescence often partly leafy-bracteate and hysteranthously foliate, the young growth puberulent with loose hairs to ±0.2 mm and minutely livid-granular, the lfts bicolored, above olivaceous brunnescent, paler beneath, facially glabrous but ciliolate.
Stipules of M. bimucronata, (1-) 1.5-6 x 0.5-1 mm, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks (1.5-)2-6(-l) cm, the petiole 8-22 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-10 mm, the ventral groove interrupted between pinna-pairs by spicules 0.4-0.9 mm; pinnae (2-)3-7-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 2.5-4.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.9-2.3 mm; paraphyllidia erect; lfts of longer pinnae (17-)20-30-jug., the blades linear-oblong from obliquely obtusangulate base, at apex abruptly apiculate, the larger ones 5-9 x 0.8-2.1(-2.5)mm, 2(-3)-nervedfrom pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2-3.5, either simple or faintly pinnate above middle, the posterior vein produced almost to blade apex.
Peduncles 2-5 per node, 5-14 mm; capitula globose, without filaments 4-5 mm diam. the ff-buds obovoid, usually hispidulous toward apex, sometimes subglabrous; bracts elliptic-oblanceolate 0.7-1 X 0.2-0.3 mm; yZow^r^ 3-merous 6-androus, in some capitula partly or mostly staminate, in some all bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.65-0.8 mm, the unequal triangular teeth to 0.2-0.3 mm; corolla white, narrowly vaseshaped 2.1-2.3 mm, the ovate, distally shaUowly concave lobes 0.7-1 x 0.6-0.8 mm; filaments white, free, exserted 3-5 mm; ovary glabrous.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 9C) either subsessile or stipitate, the stout stipe 0.7-5 mm, the broacHy linear, straight or gently recurved planocompressed body 60-75 x 8-10 mm, the shallowly undulate replum 0.6-0.8 mm wide m dorsal view, the stiffly papery valves becoming brown sublustrous venulose, scarcely elevated over seeds and there 0.1-0.15 mm thick in section, to 0.2- 0.3 mm thick at the septa but not corky-thickened, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into (6-)7-9 articles 6-8 mm long; seeds discoid, ±5-5.5 x 4.3-4.8 mm, the testa fuscous dull.
Forming scrub thickets in disturbed arboreal caatinga and in regenerating gallery woodland, scattered in seasonaUy dry parts of n.-e. Brazil: at ±300 m in lat. 5°-7°30'S in s.-e. Maranhao (Presidente Dutra; s. of Loreto); and middle S. Francisco valley in lat. ± 13°-l 5°30'S in w. Bahia (n.-e. of Bom Jesus da Lapa, at ±500 m) and n. Minas Gerais (Januaria).—Fl.
I-IV; fr.
IV-VIIL — Algadiqo.
Map 16.
Mimosa exalbescens has the (normally) stipitate piano-compressed craspedium of M. bimucronata and the trimerous ffowers of M. hexandra.
It is intermediate between them in leafformula and obviously closely related to both.
A substantially wider pod and strongly two-nerved leaffets separate it from M. pseudosepiaria, which has also the mostly tetramerous corollas of M. bimucronata.
The whitish bark of annotinous branchlets is a striking but perhaps unimportant feature of the specimens seen.
92.
Mimosa hexandra M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 30(7): 91, t. 27.
1889.-"Ad ripas ffuminis Mbay prope Paraguari, [Balansa] n. 4422."-Holotypus, collected X.1882, G!; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 14151 F! = F Neg. 54886, K! L! NY! P!—M. bimucronata subsp. hexandra (M. Micheli) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 3.
1910.
M. bimucronata subsp. hexandra var. genuina fma micheliana Hassler, I.e. M. bimucronata var. hexandra (M. Micheli) Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 12.
1919.
Acacia sp., Britton, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 7: 100.
1893 (Morong 1503, NY!).
M. hexandra var. tropica S. L. Moore, Trans. Linn. Soc. London, Bot. II, 4(3): 349.
1895.-"ad Puerto Pacheco . .. [Moore] 1078.
.
. ."—Holotypus, collected 3.
II.1892 between Commba and Asuncion, on w. bank of rio Paraguai, BM!; isotypus, NY! M. vepres Lindman, Bih.
Kongl.
Svenska Vetensk.- Akad.
Handl.
24, Afd.
3(7): 46,fig.12.
1898.-"Paraguay: Colonia Risso, in silvulis ripae aridae fluvii Rio Paraguay . .. Oct.-Nov. florens ([Lindman] A.2263)."-Holotypus, dated 30.
X.83, S!; isotypi, G! US! —M. hexandra var. vepres (Lindman) Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4(5): 554 (PI. hassler.
410).
1904.
M. bimucronata subsp. hexandra 1991] B A R N E B Y : SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) MAP 16.
Tropical and warm-temperate South America.
Ranges of M caduca (Willdenow) Poiret, M. exalbescens Bameby, and M. hexandra M. Micheli. var. genuina fma vepres (Lindman) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 4.
1910.—Equated with M. hexandra by Grether, 1987: 313.
M. acanthophora Harms, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 42: 206.
1908.—"Bahia: Taboleiro bei Remanso (ULE n. 7384-Dez.
1906)."-Holotypus, +B; isotypus, HAMB!—Equated with M. hexandra by Lewis, 1987: 135.
M. bimucronata subsp. sepiaria var. gymnocarpa Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 2.
1910.- "Paraguay: Inter mpes coUis Cerro hu pr. Paraguari, Hassler no. 6051."-Holotypus, G!; isotypus.
A! M. coroncoro KiUip & Dugand, Caldasia 3(11): 33. \9^^.—''Dugand & Jaramillo 3641, [Colombia:] Depart.
AUantico: entre Palmar de Varela y Ponedera. .. ."—The type number was attached to two coUections from the same tree, that bearing young lvs and fls being specified as holotypic; holotypus (Forero & Ruiz, Mutisia 57: 5.
1983), COL 160641; isotypi, GH! K! US!—Equated with M. hexandra by Grether, 1987: 313.
M. fascifolia Rizzini, Leandra 4-5: 9, fig. 7.
1974.— " .
.
. ad marginem lacus in Casa Nova, Bahia, haud procul a caatinga, a F. B. Ramalho 186 (4-IV-1973).
Holotypus (in RB) no. 168.523 [Fda.
Lagoa do Boi,] Juazeiro, Bahia, in caatinga, D. P. Lima 13.157 (6- VI-1973), floriferet fmctifer."
-Holotypus, not found at RB; equated with M. hexandra by Lewis, 1987: 135.
M. hexandra sensu Burkart, 1948: 112 + antecedent bibUography, fig. 15H (optima!); Arenas, Etnobot.
Lengua-Maskoy 195, fig. 29c. 1981; Bernardi, Boissiera 35: 148.
1984; Lewis, 1987, fig. 8T. Microphyllidious arborescent shrubs and trees 2-6 m, the stiff" annotinous branches pallid, lenticellate and erratically armed at and sometimes between nodes with brown, straight or apically recurved, commonly puberulent infrastipular aculei 3-5 mm, but some homotinous branchlets unarmed, the stems and all Ifand infforescenceaxes densely finely puberulent with pallid eglandular hairs sometimes mixed with livid granules, the commonly crowded lvs potentially dimorphic, the primary ones solitary, these sometimes replaced late in season by an axillary fascicle of smaller lvs, the concolorous lfts glabrous facially, usually minutely ciliolate, the pseudoracemes of smaller globose capitula either solitary and terminal to branchlets or paniculate, at anthesis leafless except sometimes at very base and projected ± 1-2 dm from foliage, but often hysteranthously leafy, the pods then axillary and immersed.
Stipules erect subulate or subsetiform 1-4 x 0.4-0.8 mm, 1 -nerved, becoming stiff" persistent.
Leafstalks of primary lvs 1.5-3.5(-4) cm, of fasciculate ones 0.4-1.5 cm, all charged between each pinna-pair with a pallid ascending spicule 0.3-1 mm, the petiole of primary lvs 5-17 mm, at middle 0.4-0.8 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 3-7(-11) mm; pinnae of primary lvs 2-4-, of fasciculate ones mostly 2-jug., the rachis of longer ones 8-30 mm; lfts of longer pinnae of primary lvs mostly 8-16-jug., exceptionally to 24-jug., of fasciculate lvs 5-8-jug., in each case either subdecrescent at each end of rachis or accrescent distally (the terminal pair then broadest), narrowly oblong to linear-oblong or (distally) semi-obovate, the longest (3-)4-8(-9.5) x 0.7-2.6 mm, ±3-4(-5) times as long as wide, all abruptly apiculate at apex, smooth above, beneath 3-4(-5)-nerved from pulvinule, the moderately displaced midrib few-branched above mid-blade, the inner posterior nerve produced nearly to blade apex, the outer ones short.
Peduncles 1-4 per node, 8-22 mm; capitula without filaments 5-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-elliptic 0.6-1 mm, 1-nerved, puberulent distally; flowers either all 3-merous or mixed 3- and 4-merous, or (exceptionally) largely 4-merous, commonly diplostemonous (rarely 4-merous 6-androus!); calyx membranous 0.7-1.2 mm, irregularly 3^-denticulate, the triangular teeth 0.2-0.5 mm, the whole puberulent extemally; corolla whitish, narrowly vaseshaped 1.8-2.8 mm, the tube glabrous, the ovate, shaUowly concave, apically callous 1 -nerved lobes 0.8-1.1 X 0.65-0.9 mm, usually densely puberulent on each side of glabrous midrib, sometimes silky overall; filaments white, monadelphous for 0.1-0.4 mm, exserted (3-)4-7 mm.
Pods 1-12 per capitulum, sessile, linear-oblong straight or subdecurved (25-)30-50(-60) x 8-ll(-14)mm, compressed but low-convex over the 6-8 (-9) seeds, the 2-ribbed suture ±0.7 mm wide ventrally, the firm suberous castaneous venulose valves either glabrous or at first puberulent but early glabrate, when ripe consisting of livid exocarp ±0.1 mm thick and crustaceous pallid endocarp to 0.5-0.7 mm thick near the transverse septa, the ripe pod often truly lomentiform, breaking (under light pressure) both through the septa and through the sutures into free-falling closed (indehiscent) subrectangular articles ± 4 - 6 mm long, but the replum at times persisting entire and the fruit a craspedium; seeds transverse, disciform ±5.5 mm diam. In low, sometimes temporarily inundated places in semideciduous or deciduous brushwoodland communities, discontinuously dispersed in tropical North and both tropical and subtropical South America: locally abundant in Paraguay, especially along rio Paraguai and its immediate affluents, extending feebly n. into the Pantanal in Mato Grosso, Brazil, and s. into Formosa and Misiones, Argentina; local in the lower S. Francisco valley, downstream from Xiquexique, in Bahia, Brazil and in adj. s. Piaui and w. Pemambuco (lat. ±8°-9°30'S); arid lowlands of n.-e. Colombia (Atlantico) and n.-w. Venezuela (Falc6n); Pacific lowlands of isthmus of Tehuantepec in Oaxaca, Mexico.—Fl. s. of the Equator IX-III(-IV), in n. South America mostly VI-IX(-?), in Mexico Yll-Xl.-Carquejo (Bahia).
Map 16, the Mexican extension not shown.
Mimosa hexandra is very closely related to M. bimucronata, but differs usually in all, and always in some combination of these characters: smaller leaves, more deeply cleft puberulent calyx, mostly or wholly trimerous corollas; but especially, as first pointed out by Burkart (1948, I.e.) in the suberous valves of the pod.
While the valves of the pod are always much thicker than those of M. bimucronata, their mode of dehiscence has proved to be less constant than expected by Burkart.
In some the whole pod breaks transversely across both valves and replum in the manner of a loment, but in others the valves alone separate into free-faUing articles and the 1991] B A R N E B Y : SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 169 replum persists.
A study of the distribution of these modes of dehiscence is hampered by lack of ripe fruiting material.
Other close relatives of M. hexandra are M. exalbescens and M. pseudosepiaria, which see for comment.
The fragmented range of M. hexandra poses a problem in interpretation.
Its immediately close kindred are all East Brazilian, and it seems reasonable to suppose that it arose as a xeromorphic derivative of M. bimucronata, acquiring in the process a reduced leaf-formula, a mostly trimerous ffower, and a modified pod, all relatively advanced characters.
It is, however, at present most abundant by far in the upper Paraguai valley, and occurs in Atlantic Brazil only very locally in northem Bahia and states adjoining to the north.
Because M. bimucronata is found, but less commonly, in Paraguay, M. hexandra might have arisen there, even by independent mutation.
The populations in northem South America and Mexico seem certainly to be derived from south of the Amazon, but whether they migrated thence by savanna pathways during episodes of forest decline or reached their contemporary habitat in xeromorphic scrub-woodland by accidents of long-distance dispersal is impossible to determine.
93.
IVIimosa lewisii Bameby, Brittonia 37: 136, fig. 5.
1985.—"Brazil.
Bahia: mun. Palmeiras, km 232 da rodovia BR-242 para Ibotirama.
Pai Inacio, ±20°30'S, 47°21'V^, G. P. Lewis (with A. de Carvalho & Hage) 554."-Holotypus, CEPEC 300931; isotypi, K! ISTY! Fig.
7.
M. lewisii sensu Lewis, 1987: 137, fig. 8Q, pi. 8C, map 9.
Stout or spindling, potentially arborescent shrubs at anthesis (1-) 1.5-5 m, the arching-ascending, early hgnescent lenticeUate branches and at times some lf-stks erratically armed with stout, basally dilated, straight or recurved, glabrous or gland-sprinkled aculei to 2-8 mm, the cauline ones either infrastipular or intemodal or both, the young stems, lf-stks and commonly all axes of infforescence in addition minutely villosulous and thinly to very densely charged with glandtipped setulae to 0.1-0.5 mm, less often to 0.5- 1 mm (but viUi and setae sometimes confined to lf-stks), the ample multifoliolate lvs bicolored. the lustrous lfts brown-olivaceous above, paler beneath, their margin minutely ciliolate or glandular-fimbriolate, the infforescence an efoliate or proximally leafy-bracteate pseudoraceme exserted ±1-2 dm from foliage.
Stipules ascending, firm or submembranous, ovate-acuminate to narrowly lanceolate 2.5-5 x 0.6-1.6 mm, 1-5- nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of primary cauline lvs 4-13 cm (of diminished and simpler bracteiform upper lvs shorter, no further described), the stout petiole including obese livid pulvinus 8-19 x 0.7-1.5 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 6-12 mm, the ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs and there with a glabrous or puberulent spinulose spicule 0.7-2 mm; pinnae of primary lvs 6-14(-16)-jug., subequilong except at one or both ends of If-stk, the rachis of longer ones 3.5-5 cm, its interfoliolar segments 0.6-1 (-1.4) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (27-)30-48-jug., the first pair 0.2-1 mm distant from small conic-subulate paraphyllidia, all in outline Unear-oblong obtuse or subapiculate, the larger ones 4.5-6.5 x 0.8-1.4 mm, the firm blades veinless above, subcentrically costate beneath, other venulation scarcely perceptible.
Peduncles solitary and 2-3 together, widely ascending (1.5-)2-5(-5.5) cm; capitula squatly ovoid or hemispherical, the lower ffs spreading-ascending from receptacle, the whole without filaments 9- 12 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linearor rhombic-lanceolate to 1.5 mm, or sometimes subobsolete; flowers 4- or randomly 5-merous diplostemonous, all bisexual; calyx campanulate 1.3-3.4 mm, its lobes broadly ovate or obtusely deltate, separated by unequal sinuses (0.1-)0.3-0.9 mm deep; corolla greenish-white 4.5-5.5 mm, the firm erect ovate, apically thickened and subcucuUate, faintly 3-nerved lobes 1.4- 2 mm; filaments whitish, free, nearly 0.3 mm diam., exserted 3-4 mm; anthers (0.55-)0.6-0.8 mm.
Pods mostly 1-3 per capitulum, commonly subsessile, broadly linear and often lunately curved 9-13 x 0.7-0.9 cm, at base cuneately tapering into receptacle or rarely into a stipe to 3 mm, at apex attenuate into a triangular-acuminate beak, planocompressed except where colUculate over seeds, either glabrous or minutely puberulent and glandular-setulose overall, the shaUowly undulate-constricted replum 0.6-1 mm wide, the stiffly papery, glossy green red-tinged or mahogany-brown valves breaking up when FIG. 7.
Mimosa lewisii Bameby.
A. Rowering branchlet.
B. Portion of peduncle.
C. Leaflet, ventral (upper left) and dorsal (right) views.
D. Flower.
E. Pods. (D from Irwin 30988, the rest from Mori & Boom 14524.) ripe into 9-14(-15) rhombic-elliptic free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 6-12 mm long; seeds ±5.5-6 x 4-4.7 mm, the smooth testa brown or atrocastaneous.
In campo rupestre, in open woodland on sandstone, and on stream-banks, locally plentiful at (580-)700-1200 m in Chapada Diamantina of centr. and n.-centr. Bahia, BrazU, from Sa. do Curral Feio (10°22'S) through Sas. do Tombador, da Agua de Rega and dos Len9ois to Sa. do Sincora (13°6'S); disjunct at or below 300 m in valleys of rios Vasa Barris and Itapicuru in n.-e. Bahia, and on white dunes at sea level along the coast n. of Salvador.-R. XII-III, VI. Map 12.
Floral features peculiar to M. lewisii in the context of its group are hemispherical capitula, deeply campanulate, irregularly lobed calyx, long coroUa, and stout filaments scarcely twice as long. The species is randomly variable in the distribution, length and density of excretory glands. which may be stemless or elevated on a setular stalk to 3 mm in length, and either massed along the new stems or confined to the ventral ribs of the leaf-stalks.
There seem to be no significant differences between the populations found on the coastal lowlands and those of the upland interior.
A comparable dispersal pattem is known in Chamaecrista cytisoides (Colladon) Irwin & Barneby var. brachystachya (Bentham) Irwin & Barneby.
94.
JVIimosa paraibana Bameby, nom. nov. M. platycarpa Ducke, Anais Acad. Brasil.
Ci.
31(2): 290.
1959, nom. illeg.-"[Ceara:] .
.
. secus viam publicam Fortaleza-Maranguape .
.
. legit A. Ducke 2542, fforebat martio ad junium, fructibus maturis junio ad julium."
—Syntypi (ff, fr), IAN!; isosyntypi, ff.
23.
III.1956 & fr.
VI.1956, K! RB!-Non M. platycarpa Bentham, 1875.
Amply leafy, xerophytic but not notably xeromorphic subsarmentose shrubs and slender trees attaining 9 m, either randomly armed on intemodes and along dorsal rib of some lf-stks with recurved aculei 0.5-1.5 mm or some leafy stems unarmed, the homotinous branchlets, foliage and axes of infforescence villosulous with soft, spreading or incumbent, whitish hairs to 0.1-0.3 mm mixed (especially at stem-nodes) with minute livid granules, the lfts when dry either dull brown-olivaceous on both faces or pallid beneath, pubemlent on both faces, the globose or plumply ellipsoid or oblong capitula fasciculate in distal If-axils, forming an exserted pseudoraceme only in very early anthesis.
Stipules firm, erect-incurved, narrowly lanceolate ±3-6 X 0.3-0.7 mm, pubemlent both within and without, tardily deciduous.
Leafstalks (reddish when fresh) 3.5-9.5(-10) cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 1.5-4.5 cm, at middle 0.6-1 mm diam., bluntly carinate dorsally and laterally, openly grooved ventrally, the interpinnal segments 4- 15 mm, the groove intermpted between pinnapairs by a short spicule; pinnae 4-7-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 2.5-5.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2.5^ mm; lfts of distal pinnae 8-16-jug., on slender livid pulvinule 0.3-0.5 mm, either subequilong or markedly accrescent upward, the small first pair 1-3.5 mm distant from subdeffexed subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.5 mm, the larger blades obliquely oblong-obovate from semicordate or obtusangulate base, 5-11 x 2-4.3 mm, ±2.2- 3.4 times as long as wide, at apex broadly rounded but minutely apiculate, veinless above, beneath slenderly 3-nerved from pulvinule, the forwardly displaced costa dividing blade 1:2-2.5 and giving rise on each side to 2-4 secondary venules brochidodrome well within the margin, the inner posterior vein produced to mid-blade or beyond, the outer one(s) weak and short.
Peduncles 1-2.5 cm; capitula without filaments 5- 7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the axis becoming 2-7(-l 6) mm; bracts membranous oblanceolate ±0.3-0.9 X 0.2 mm, either deciduous or subpersistent; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, many proximal ones staminate; calyx submembranous campanulate 0.7-1.3 X 0.6-0.7 mm, extemally either glabrous or puberulent, the very short lobes depressed-deltate; corolla membranous vase-shaped or narrowly turbinate, the bisexual ones 2.1-3.1 mm, their ovate acute 1-nerved lobes 0.8-1.3 x 0.6-0.8 mm, minutely puberulent at tip; filaments pink, free from base, exserted 3.5-5.5 mm.
Pods 1-4 per capitulum, shortly stipitate, the stipe 1-3 mm, the body broadly oblong rounded at both ends 50-60 x 17-28 mm, planocompressed except for a colliculus over each of 8-10 seeds, the replum 0.5- 0.7 mm wide, abruptly produced at apex into an erect, sometimes deciduous cusp 2.5-4 mm, the papery valves reddish drying brown, minutely thinly puberulent and densely minutely glandular-punctate, not seen fully ripe but apparently separating from replum and certainly breaking up into articles 5-6.5 mm long, hence nearly thrice as broad as long; seeds not seen.
In caatinga and disturbed semideciduous woodland, sometimes locally abundant on granitic substrates, endemic to n.-e. Brazil, from centr. Maranhao e. to n.-centr. Pemambuco, n. to n. Ceara.-n. HI-V, VIII, XII, the fuU cycle unknown.
Map 15.
Mimosa paraibana has the general organization of M. bimucronata, but differs at anthesis in broader leaffets and pink filaments, and is unmistakable when bearing the broad papery pods, unlike those of any sympatric member of the genus.
95.
Mimosa cubatanensis Hoehne, Bol. Inst.
BrasiL Sci. 2: 246, t. 2.
1926.-"^^o Paulo: no. 4690, F. C. Hoehne leg. Alto da Serra da Estrada do Vergueiro, entre Santos e Sao Paulo em 23/12/920."-Holotypus, SP, not seen.
Amply leafy trees attaining 5 m, either unarmed or armed on ffowering branches with stout spreading-ascending broad-based, immediately or distantly infrastipular aculei to 2-6 mm, the young branchlets, lfts and axes of broad short efoliate infforescence pilosulous with weak loose whitish or sordid hairs 0.1-0.25 mm sometimes mixed with minute livid granules, the foliage bicolored, the plane thin-textured lfts dull olivaceous above, paler beneath, finely strigulose-pubemlent on both faces but thinly so above, the panicle of pseudoracemes of small globose capitula exserted ±1-1.5 dm from foliage.
Stipules lance-subulate 1-2.5 x 0.3-0.5 mm, 1-nerved, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 5-12 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus (1-) 1.5-3 cm, at middle 0.6-1.2 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 8-15 mm, the shallow ventral groove bridged between pinnae but spicules 0; pinnae (3-)4-8-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 4-5.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2.5-4 mm; lfts of larger pinnae 11-17- jug., decrescent at both ends of rachis, the first pair (1.5-)2-3.5 mm distant from minute subulate, erect or subreffexed paraphyUidia, the blades of all obliquely oblong-ovate from semicordate base, abruptly deltate-acute or sharply apiculate, the larger ones 7-10 x 2.5-3.5 mm, 2.4-2.8 times as long as wide, all 3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ± 1:2.5-3, 2-3- branched beyond middle, the outer posterior nerve very short, the inner one produced well beyond mid-blade and brochidodrome well within the margin, the venation prominulous only beneath.
Peduncles mostly fasciculate by 2-4, very slender 6-16 mm; capitula without filaments ±5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the ffbuds either glabrous or microscopically puberulent at tip; bracts oblanceolate 0.4-0.7 mm, puberulent dorsally, caducous; calyx campanulate 0.5-0.6 mm, extemally glabrous, the broadly lowdenticulate rim thinly minutely ciliolate; corollas whitish, narrowly funnelform 2.3-3 mm, the submembranous ovate acute 1 -nerved lobes 0.8- 1 X 0.6-0.7 mm; filaments white, the longer ones exserted 3-3.5 mm; ovary pubemlent.
Pods ascending, stipitate, the stipe 4-5 mm, the body in profile broad-linear straight, broadly obtuse, 6.5- 8.5 X 1.3-1.4 cm, piano-compressed, 7-8-seeded, the replum 0.6-0.7 mm wide, the papery glabrate valves becoming fuscous-brown sublustrous, tardily breaking into oblong, individually indehiscent articles 8-9 mm long; seeds in broad view obovate ±5 x 3.5 mm, the pleurogram ±3.5 X 1.5 mm.
A species of unknown ecology and poorly documented range, apparently native on the Atlantic slope and coastal plain of s.-e. Brazil from s. Minas Gerais (Manua^u) to e. Parana (mun. Antonina), cultivated (Heringer 13943, UB, 18641, NY) in Distrito Federal.-R. IX-I. This poorly known mimosa resembles M. bimucronata in habit and especially in the exserted panicle of small white capitula, but differs in leaflets approximately half as many and twice as broad, dull on both faces and paler beneath.
It is perhaps as closely related to the also inadequately known M. catharinensis, which differs in leaffets yet fewer and larger and in restinga habitat on the coast of Santa Catarina, and is in addition said to be sarmentose.
Mimosa paraibana of northeastern Brazil, very similar to M. cubatanensis in leaf-formula, differs in armament of recurved scattered (not infrastipular acroscopic, in some branches wanting) prickles, largely leaf-subtended rather than paniculate peduncles, a shorter calyx, and pink filaments.
Dimensions of leaffets given in the foregoing description are taken from the specimens studied; according to the protologue they may be a little longer and substantially wider, attaining 10- 12 X 6-8 mm.
Rowering branches of the plant cultivated at Brasilia are unarmed.
96.
Mimosa catharinensis Burkart in Reitz, Fl. ilustr. catarin.
LEGU(l): 158, est. 29, map.
1979.-"Brasilia, Santa Catarina, Rio Vermelho, Ilha de S. Catarina.
.
.
Klein & Bresolin 5.946 (26.04.1965)."-Holotypus, SI (not seen).
Scandent shrubs, armed on intemodes and on back of some lf-stks with few scattered recurved aculei 1-3 mm, almost glabrous, the foliage nigrescent when dry, the infforescence a loose terminal, largely efoliate panicle of globose capitula exserted up to 2 dm from foliage.
Stipules subulate 5-6 mm, subpersistent.
Leafstalks ±6-10 cm, the petiole 2-4 cm, the interpinnal segments ±1-1.6 cm; pinnae 3-5-jug., slightly decrescent distaUy, the axis of longer ones 3-6 cm, the slender paraphyllidia to 1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 6-9-jug., the blade oblong-ovate from asymmetrically rounded base, deltately subacute, the larger ones 10-18 x 3-6 mm, aU 3-4-nerved from pulvinule, the slender midrib only a little forwardly displaced from mid-blade, the posterior nerves short and weak.
Peduncles 1-4 per node, to 2 cm; capitula without filaments ±7.5 mm diam.; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, glabrous; calyx campanulate ±1.2 mm, shorttoothed; corolla 3-3.2 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave, weakly 1-nerved lobes ±1.2-0.8 mm; filaments white; ovary glabrous; pod unknown.
In coastal restinga at ±2 m, known only from the n. end of Ilha de Sta. Catarina in mun. Florian6polis, Sta. Catarina, Brazil.—R.X, IV(-?).
The foregoing description is compiled from the protologue, as I have seen no material of the species.
It appears very close in most characters to M. bimucronata, but has fewer and broader leaffets.
These resemble leaffets of M. cubatanensis in size and venation, but are significantly fewer; and the armament of recurved rather than acroscopic prickles, perhaps related to a scandent growth-habit, is decidedly different.
97.
Mimosa caduca (Willdenow) Poiret, Encycl.
Suppl. 1: 83.
1810, based on Acacia caduca Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1089.
1^06.—"'Habitat in America meridionah."
', the data expanded by Kunth in Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, Nov. gen. sp. 6(qu): 266.
1824: "in ripa ffuminis Cachiyacu, prope GualtalquiUo Pemvianomm, alt. 650 hex."
— Holotypus, B-WILLD 19191, seen in Microform!; isotypi, Humboldt & Bonpland 3499, PHBK! P (hb. Bonpland.)! M. xerophytica Schery, Phytologia9: 346.
1964.-"Ecuador: Prov. Loja:.
.
. between Vilcabamba and Cachiyacu, alt. 1600-2100 m., Julian A. Steyermark 54368A.''-Holotypus, collected 6.
X.43 (fr), MO! = NY Neg. 11627; isotypus, F! = F Neg. 54874.
M. caduca sensu Bentham, 1875: 414.
Trees attaining 7 m, with striped lenticellate annotinous branches, either unarmed or randomly armed with few infranodal aculei 1-2.5 mm, the young leafy branches, all axes of lvs and infforescence and the pallid dorsal face of strongly bicolored lfts densely silky-pUosulous overaU with fine loose ± wavy and entangled hairs to 0.15-0.4 mm mixed with minute Uvid granular trichomes, the convex upper face of lfts lustrous dark brown (when dry), thinly transiently puberulent, the effuse infforescence composed of efoliate simple pseudoracemes or small panicles ±1-1.5 dm of subglobose or ellipsoid capitula arising from distal If-axils and terminal to branchlets. ^S^/pw/^^ erect subulate 1.5-3.5 x 0.3- 0.7 mm, densely tomentellous dorsally, not visibly veined, becoming dry and fragile but persistent with associated If.
Leafstalks 4-10 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus (1.2-) 1.5-3 cm, at middle 0.8-1.5 mm diam., the wide shallow ventral groove interrupted between pinnapairs by a triangular-subulate spicule, the longer interpinnal segments (8-) 10-18 mm; pinnae 4- 6-jug., either accrescent or decrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 2.5-6 cm, the interfoliolar segments to (3-)4-7 mm; Ifts of longer pinnae 6-10-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 2.5-5 mm distant from paraphyllidia ±0.5 mm, the blades inequilaterally elliptic, ovateor oblong-eUiptic from broadly cuneate base, broadly obtuse at apex, those near midrachis 8-13 X 3-6.5 mm, 1.8-2.7 times as long as wide, the terminal pair obliquely obovate, all nerveless above, beneath weakly 3-nerved from pulvinule, the straight, simple or faintly 1 -branched midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2- 3.5, the inner posterior nerve expiring beyond mid-blade well within the revolute margin, the outer ones often obscure or imperceptible.
Peduncles mostly 2-4 per node of infforescence, 9- 20 mm; capitula without filaments 6-10 x 5-7 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the plumply obovoid ff-buds antrorsely puberulent overall; bracts linear-oblanceolate 0.6-1.1 x 0.1-0.2 mm, caducous; flowers mostly 4-merous, some distal ones often 5-merous, all diplostemonous, of unknown color when fresh (probably whitish), stramineous when dry; calyx membranous campanulate 1.2-1.4 mm, the 4-5 low-deltate teeth ±0.2 mm; corolla narrowly funnelform 2.3-3.3 mm, the ovate 1-nerved, shallowly concave lobes 1- 1.1 X 0.6-0.8 mm; filaments free to base, exserted 4-5 mm; ovary pilosulous.
Pods 1-5 per capitulum subsessile, in profile undulately linear, when weU fertilized ±40-50 x 5.5-8 mm, 5-8- seeded, the shallowly constricted, remotely aculeate replum and stiflfly papery valves alike pilose-tomentulose overall, the valves when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 5-7 mm long; seeds lentiform ±3.7 X 3 rnm, the testa smooth, dull pinkishbrown.
In seasonally arid montane environment between 800 and 2300 m, the microhabitat not recorded, very local in the Andes of s. Ecuador, in s. prov. Loja (Cordillerita San Barbolo; Cachiyacu-Vilcabamba), and in immediately adj. Cajamarca, Pem (prov. Jaen).—R. VII-IX. Map 16.
Bentham saw only indifferent specimens of M. caduca, and referred the species to his ser. Leptostachyae next to M. guatemalensis, describing the capitula as oblong spikes.
The capitula are now known to vary at full anthesis from plumply ellipsoid to subglobose, and are very similar to those of M. (Andinae) andina, except that most ffowers are tetramerous rather than pentamerous.
Moreover the fruit of M. caduca is not pseudofoUicuIar like that of its pentamerous neighbors in the Andes but an ordinary craspedium prevalent in ser. Bimucronatae.
Although at first sight a relationship to Andean species of comparable growth-habit and dry tropical-montane ecology seems more plausible than kinship to morphologically similar but remotely allopatric Mexican, Brazilian or AntiUean ones, I find no technical grounds for excluding M. caduca from ser. Bimucronatae.
In its Andean context M. caduca is readily recognized by conspicuously bicolored leaffets, convex and shiny dark green (when dry, brown) above and pallidly silky-pilosulous beneath.
Mimosa xerophytica is certainly synonymous with M. caduca.
The type-localities lie close together on the Ecuador-Peru boundary, and the type-specimens are in close accord.
98.
Mimosa troncosoae Fortunato & Bameby, sp. nov., notulis plurimis cum ser. Bimucronatis associanda, sed fforum defectu afl&nitatis subdubiae, inter illas autem foliolis paucis (7- 9-jugis usque) et majusculis 16-18 x 6-8.5 mm usque) praestans.—Paraguay.
Chaco: Parque Nacional Defensores del Chaco, Cerro Le6n, 7.
Vm.l983 (fr), Wm. Hahn 1548.- Holotypus, NY; isotypi, BAB, MO.—M. hahnii Bameby, in sched.,
nom. nud. Trees to 6 m with densely lenticellate unarmed branchlets, appearing glabrous but the very young twigs and lf-stks viscid-puberulent with fine short hairs and capitate setulae ±0.1 mm, the ample plane thin-textured, when dry dark brown lfts tmly glabrous, the infforescence (little known) a short terminal pseudoraceme of globose capitula.
Stipules herbaceous oblong obtuse 2-3 x 0.7-1 mm, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 4.5-7 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus ±12 x 0.8-1.1 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 1.5-2 cm, the ventral sulcus either continuous between pinna-pairs or bridged but spicules 0; pinnae 3-4-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of distal ones 4.5- 6.5 cm, the longer interfoUolar segments 6-8 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 7-9-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the first pair 4-5 mm distant from reffexed subulate paraphyllidia ±1 mm, the blades oblong from semicordate base, broadly obtuse emarginate, the larger ones 16-18 x 6- 8.5 mm, ±2.1-2.5 times as long as wide, all 4- 5-nerved from pulvinule, the moderately displaced midrib pinnately 3-4-branched on each side, the inner posterior nerve well beyond midblade, the venation raised on both faces, coarsely prominulous beneath.
Peduncles ±1.5 cm; fforal receptacle ±1.5 mm diam.; flowers unknown.
Pod solitary ascending, the stipe ±2 mm, the straight Unear-oblong planocompressed body 45- 50 X 8.5-9.5 mm, 5-7-seeded, the nearly straight replum 0.8 mm wide, the stiffly papery glabrous valves lustrous venulose, breaking when ripe into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 6-9 mm long. Along streams in rich deep loamy soil, known only from the cited locality, at 20°20'S, 60°20'W, in depto. Chaco, Paraguay.
Although not seen in ffower, this obviously distinct mimosa is confidently assigned to the circle of affinity of which M. bimucronata is the best known member.
Its relatively few and large leaffets are characteristic, most nearly approached in size and number, within the group, by distantly allopatric M. catharinensis.
From sympatric M. hexandra it differs not only in foliage but in the papery craspedium.
We dedicate this species to the memory of Nelida Troncoso (1912-1988), specialist in Verbenaceae.
B(viii).
Series LEUCAENOIDEAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Leucaenoideae Bameby, ser. nov., in sectione caulibus inermibus et foliolis simul paucis (2-7-jugis) ac ampUs (1-4 cm usque longis) praestans.—Sp. typica: M. leucaenoides Bentham.—M. XXII. Leucaenoides Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
22(3): 145, in clave.
1928.
MacrophyUidious, unarmed, potentiaUy arborescent shrubs with terminal, efoliate or hysteranthously partly foliate pseudoracemes of globose capitula.
Indumentum composed of minute suberect granular trichomes, eglandular, sometimes 0.
Stipules small, linear or subulate 0-1- nerved.
Leaf-formula i-iv/2-7, the larger lfts 1- 4 cm.
Flowers either 4- or 5-merous, diplostemonous; calyx campanulate 0.8-1.6 mm, the teeth depressed-deltate; coroUa-lobes glabrous 1 -nerved; filaments obscurely monadelphous below ovary.
Pod (unknown in M. torresiae) subsessile or shortly stipitate, in profile linear or broad-linear decurved 35-85 x 6-12 mm, 4-9- seeded, the replum smooth, the dehiscence craspedial.
Spp. 3, of seasonally dry or desert brush-woodland in Sa.
Madre Oriental and Isthmus of Tehuantepec, Mexico.
Conspectus of ser. Leucaenoideae Mimosa * Pinnae l(-2) and leaflets mostly 3-4 pairs; Sa.
Madre Oriental.
100. leucaenoides Bentham 101. martin-delcampoi Gonzalez-Medrano ** Pinnae 2-4 and leaflets mostly 5-7 pairs; Oaxaca.
99. torresiae R. Grether Key to species of ser. Leucaenoideae Lf-formula ii-iv/5-7; Oaxaca 99.
M torresiae (p. 175).
Lf-formula i(-ii)/(2-)3-4(-5); Sa.
Madre Oriental (s. Tamps, and adj. S.L.P. to Hdgo.).
2.
Lfts of each pinna (2-)3-4(-5)-jug., secondary nerves of lfts camptodrome within the margin; pod 6-8.5 mm wide; range as given 100.
M. leucaenoides (p. 176).
2.
Lfts of each pinna 2-jug.; secondary nerves of lfts anastomosing with a continuous marginal nerve; pod 9-12 mm wide; very local in s. Tamps 101.
M. martin-delcampoi (p. 176).
99.
Mimosa torresiae R. Grether, Syst. Bot. 15: 435, fig. 1-3.
1990.—"Mexico, Oaxaca, Distrito de Tehuantepec, subida al Cerro Guiengola por la ladera Sur, 6.
XI. 1986, M. L. Torres et al. 657. —Holotypus, MEXU (not seen); isotypes, to be distributed, NY, US, etc.
Unarmed macrophyllidious shrubs or treelets of unknown height, with paUid annotinous and purpUsh ribbed homotinous branchlets, the young stems, If-axes, lower face of some lfts, and peduncles thinly minutely pubemlent, the lfts bicolored, dull dark green above, paler beneath, venulose on both faces, the pseudoracemose inflorescence of globose capitula efoliate or at base hysteranthously foUate, weU exserted from foliage.
Stipules linear-lanceolate ±3-4 x 0.6 mm, 1-nerved.
Leaf-formula ii-iv/5-7, the lf-stks 2- 5.5 cm, the petiole 1-2 cm, the ventral groove continuous, spicules 0; rachis of longer pinnae 3-4 cm, the interfoliolar segments 4-6 mm; lfts oblong or oblong-obovate, broadly obtuse or shallowly emarginate, the longer ones 10-14 x 4-6 mm, all 4-5-nerved from pulvinule, the pinnately branched midrib scarcely excentric, the also branched inner posterior nerve produced well beyond mid-blade, all secondary venules further branched into a weak reticulum, the venation almost immersed above, prominulous beneath.
Peduncles 2-4-nate; capitula without filaments 6.5-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the caducous linear bracts less than 1 mm, the clavate receptacle less than 2 mm long, the ff-buds obovoid glabrous; flowers 5-merous 10-androus; calyx membranous, deeply campanulate 1.4-1.6 mm, the deltate teeth less than 0.15 mm; corolla 3.6-4 mm, cleft nearly to middle, the 1-nerved lobes 1.7-2 x 0.8 mm; filaments (? white), united into an obscure stemonozone, exserted 4-5 mm; ovary puberulent after fertilization; ovules seven; pod unknown.
In unrecorded habitat, to be expected in drought-deciduous thom-scrub, known only from Cerro Guiengola w.-s.-w. of Sto. Domingo Tehuantepec (±16°15'N, 95°20'W) on the Pacific slope of Isthmus of Tehuantepec, s. Oaxaca, Mexico.-n. III(-?).
100.
Mimosa leucaenoides Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 89.
1846.-"Zimapan in [state of Hidalgo,] Mexico."
—Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! Macrophyllidious unarmed shrubs and treelets attaining 4.5 m, the annotinous defoliate branches fuscous, the homotinous ones and If-axes minutely puberulent and densely livid-granular, esetose, the subconcolorous thick-textured venulose lfts facially glabrous except for scattered granules, the globose capitula 2-6-nate in the axil of coeval lvs, sometimes pseudoracemose in praefforation.
Stipules triangular-deltate, less than 1 mm, caducous.
Leaf-formula i(-ii)/(2-)3-4(- 5); petiole 6-22 mm, espiculate; rachis of pinnae 1.5-4 cm; lfts accrescent distally, broadly obovate or elliptic or rarely elliptic-oblanceolate, all obtuse, the distal pair (13-) 15-30(-35) x (6-)8- 19(-25) mm, all palmately 4-5-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric, the primary nerves all branched, the veinlets camptodrome within the margin.
Peduncles 1-3 cm; capitula without filaments 5.5-6 mm diam., moriform, the obovoid ff-buds glabrous;^ow^r^ 4-merous (random lower ones 3-merous), diplostemonous, all bisexual; calyx narrowly campanulate 4-ribbed 1.2- 1.4 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth ±0.2 mm, granular-fimbriolate; coroUa vase-shaped 2.7-3.2 mm, the nearly erect lobes faintly 1 -nerved; filaments pink, brieffy monadelphous below ovary, exserted 3.5-4.5 mm.
Pods few per capitulum, subsessile, in profile undulately linear, long-cuspidate, gently decurved, the body ±50-85 x 6- 8.5 mm, 6-9-seeded, the replum and chartaceous valves alike densely livid-granular overall, the low-convex free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 6-7 mm long. On rocky hillsides and limestone cliff'-ledges near 450-1700 m, localized on Sa.
Madre Oriental in s. Tamaulipas, e. S. Luis Potosi and adj. Hidalgo, Mexico.-H. V-VII. 101.
Mimosa martin-delcampoi Gonzalez-Medrano, Bol. Soc. Bot. Mexico 43: 40.
1983.— "Mexico: Tamaulipas.
7 km al norte de Magdaleno AguUar (Santiaguillo).
Municipio de Jaumave .
.
.
14 de septiembre de 1976.
Col.
F. Gonzalez Medrano, 9818 "-Holotypus, ENCB (not seen); isotypus, K! Macrophyllidious shrubs with terete purplish branches, leathery dark green, comeous-marginate, venulose lfts and globose capitula in terminal efoliate pseudoracemes, glabrous throughout, unarmed, eglandular.
Stipules deltate or triangular-subulate 1-2.5 mm, persistent.
Leaf-formula ill, the petioles (3-)4-18 mm, ventrally depressed but esulcate, espiculate; rachis of longer pinnae 2-6 cm, the paraphyllidia terete 0.4- 0.8 mm; lfts obliquely obovate or reniform, broadly obtuse, at base often cuneately contracted to the wrinkled pulvinule, the slightly larger distal pair ± 2-4 x 1.5-2.8 cm, all strongly (4-)5- 6-nerved from pulvinule, the primary nerves all forked distally and anastomosing with a continuous undulate marginal nerve 0.2-0.3 mm thick, the venation prominent and pallid beneath, less so above.
Peduncles 1-3-nate 13-25 mm; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam., moriform, the pyriform ff-buds glabrous; flowers 4-5-merous diplostemonous, pink, glabrous; calyx membranous campanulate 0.8-1 mm, the teeth ±0.1 mm; corolla 2.6-3.6 mm, the lobes erect or weakly spreading distally, faintly 1 -nerved; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.3-0.4 mm about stipe of glabrous ovary, exserted 3^.5 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, in profile broad-linear, gently decurved, (20-)35-50 x 9-12 mm, (3-)4-8- seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 2-5 mm, cuspidate at apex, the smooth replum not or scarcely constricted, the brown or livid, papery valves coUiculate over each seed, the free-falling articles 5.5-7 mm long. In matorral on limestone or gypsum, 1700- 2200 m, very local, known only from mun. Bustamente and Palmillas in s.-e. TamauUpas, Mexico.-H. V-VIII. B(ix).
Series RUBICAULES Bentham Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Rubicaules Bentham.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Rubicaules Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 394, quoad spp. asiaticas, americanis exceptis.
1842.—Sp. typica: M. rubicaulis Lamarck.
M. VII. Malacophyllae 8L XX. Sinaloenses Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 145, in clave.
1928. ^^^U BARNEBY: SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 177 Rank, scandent or sarmentose, soft-woody land Atlantic and Pacific Mexico, and submonvines with serially retro-aculeate stems and Iftane Central America, and about a dozen in Afstks, simply puberulent, pUosulous, or glabrate, rica and s.-e. Asia. nowhere setose or glandular.
Stipules linear-seThis group of four North American mimosas tiform, 1-nerved or extemally nerveless.
Leafappears to be inseparable by any substantial formula ii-ix(-x)/4-19, the rachis spiculate or character from Asiatic M. rubicaulis Lamarck, not, the larger lfts 6.5-35 mm.
Inflorescence eiwith which Bentham associated the two species ther simply racemose or paniculate, wholly or known to him in 1875, M. malacophylla andM. distally efoliate, the flowers capitulate, sessile or costaricensis (=the present M. ervendbergii).
Their short-pedicellate; calyx campanulate, minutely close relatives are the West Indian Fagaradenticulate; corolla either 4- or 5-merous, whitcanthae, of which the typical members have scatish, diplostemonous, but some of the inner whorl tered, rather than serial prickles on the stems and of stamens in M. malacophylla either sterile or recurved ones subtending at least some pairs of lacking; filaments united into a very short steleaffets.
A random suppression or degradation of monozone below stipe of ovary.
Pods stipitate, the inner whorl of stamens, common in Fagarain profile broad-linear (8-)9-18 mm wide, the canthae, recurs in M. malacophylla, y^hich forms replum smooth or retro-aculeate, the dehiscence a bond between the two series.
Also very similar craspedial. in general habit and armature are the Ceratoniae, Spp. 4 of s.-w. United States (s. Texas), lowwhich differ, however, in trimerous ffowers.
Conspectus of ser. Rubicaules in North America Mimosa * Calyx deeply campanulate, ±1.5-2 mm long; lfts small; androecium perfect; tropical.
102. ervendbergii A. Gray 103. sinaloensis Britton & Rose ** Calyx shallow-campanulate, ±0.5 mm long; lfts large, subrhombic; androecium perfect; tropical Mexico and Central America.
104. hondurana Britton & Rose *** Calyx shallow-campanulate, ±0.5 mm long; lfts of median size, ovate-elliptic; some antepetalous stamens sterile or wanting; extratropical e. Mexico and adj. Texas.
105. malacophylla A. Gray Key to American species of ser. Rubicaules 1.
Calyx deeply campanulate 1.4-1.9 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 8-18-jug. 2.
Plants of moist lowland forest in s.-e. and s. Mexico and Central America (s.-e. to Costa Rica); stems sordidly viUosulous between the aculei; lf-stks spiculate between pinna-pulvini; lfts of longer pinnae 13-18-jug 102.
M. ervendbergii (p. 177) 2.
Plants of drought-deciduous thom-forest of w. tropical Mexico (Sinaloa and Jalisco); stems minutely pubemlent between aculei; lf-stks espiculate (so far as known); lfts of longer pinnae 8-12-jug 103.
M sinaloensis (p. 178).
1.
Calyx ShaUowly campanulate 0.3-0.6 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 4-8-jug. 3.
Lfts (ob)ovate-elliptic, the larger ones 7.5-14 x 4.5-9 mm; fls (4-)5-merous; minutely pediceUate, in ellipsoid capitula 1.1-2.3 times as long as wide with receptacular axis 4-10 mm at maturity; androecium 5-10-merous, but less than 10 stamens antheriferous; s. Texas, U.S.A. to extratropical Tamaulipas, Mexico, in seasonally dry lowlands 105.
M malacophylla (p. 179).
3.
Lfts obliquely rhombic, the larger ones 15-35 x 4.5-9 mm; fls 4-merous sessile, in globose capitula; androecium 10-merous perfect; submontane at 300-1250 m, from s. Mexico (Chiapas) to Belize and Honduras 104.
M. hondurana (p. 178).
102.
Mimosa ervendbergii A. Gray, Proc. Amer. near Wartenberg .
.
. near Tantoyuca in the Acad. Arts 5:178.
1862.—".. .in the savannas Ancient Province Huasteca [n. Veracruz], Mexico."
—Holotypus (Grether, 1987: 311): Ervendberg2, ex parte, GH (plant at left only)!; photo of same, NY! M. costaricensis Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 423.
1875.—"Aguacate in Costa Rica, Oersted; New Spain, Herb. P<2vo«."
—Lectotypus (Grether, 1987: 311): Oersted 15, K (hb. Benth.)!-Equated with M. ervendbergii by Grether, 1987, I.e. M. mexiquitensis Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 168.
1928.-"Finca Mexiquita, Chiapas, September, 1913 ... [C. ^.] Purpus 6<576."-Holotypus, NY!—Equated with M. ervendbergii by Grether, 1987: 312.
Neomimosa (?) donnell-smithii Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 173.
1928.-"Cubilquitz, Guatemala, 1902,7/. von Tuerckheim 8197."—Holotypus, USl—Mimosa donnell-smithii (Britton & Rose) Standley & Steyermark, Publ. Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 23: 163.
1944.—Equated with M. ervendbergii by Grether, 1987: 312.
Mimosa scalpens Standley, Publ. Carnegie Inst.
Wash. 461 (=Bot. Maya area): 58.
1935. "
British Honduras: Vicinity of Jacinto HiUs, W. A. Schipp 1306."
- Holotypus, F 7336871 = F Neg. 52895; isotypus, NY!—EquatedwithM ervendbergiihy Grether, 1987: 312.
Amply microphyllidious vines or scandent shrubs 2 m upward, the stems and lf-stks serially armed with cat's-claw prickles and sordidly villosulous, the plane lfts strongly bicolored, the globose capitula paniculate exserted.
Stipules linear-setiform.
Leaf-formula iii-ix(-x)/13-18, the petiole 2-3.5 cm, the interpinnal segments 1-2 cm, the ventral sulcus of If-rachis bridged between pinnae and spiculate, the lfts oblong or narrowly ovate-oblong, abruptly acuminulate, the larger ones ±7-11 x 2—4 mm, all 2-nerved dorsally, the subcentric midrib nearly straight.
Capitula mostly 2-3 per node, prior to anthesis moriform; flowers 4-5-merous diplostemonous, white fragrant; calyx campanulate 1.4-1.9 mm, puberulent extemally, the triangular teeth a trifle thickened, 0.3-0.4 mm; coroUa 3-3.4 mm, puberulent or subglabrous; filaments monadelphous through 0.1-0.2 mm, exserted 5-5.5 mm.
Pods 1-4 per capitulum, the stipe 2-10 mm, the body in profile broad-linear 40-7 5 x 12-18 mm, obtuse apiculate, (5-)6-10-seeded, the replum shallowly or scarcely undulate, 0.4-0.7 mm wide, randomly retro-aculeate, the free-falling articles 5-8.5 mm long. In moist lowland and lower montane forest, 200-950 m, s. Mexico (Veracruz, Tabasco, Puebla, Oaxaca, Chiapas), Belize, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica.-Fl. (IX-)X-XII(-?).
103.
Mimosa sinaloensis Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 163.
1928.-"Sinaloa [Mexico].
Type from thickets near Mazatlan, April 1, 1910, Rose, Standley & Russell 13830.''- Holotypus, NY!; isotypus, US! Amply microphyllidious prickly vines of tropical deciduous thom-forest, attaining 7 m, the old stems silvery-gray, the young ones green, all, like the primary and secondary If-axes, armed with serial cat's-claw aculei, otherwise thinly or only vestigially puberulent, esetose, the lfts bicolored, minutely puberulent beneath and minutely ciliolate.
Stipules stiflily linear-setiform.
Leaf-formula (ii-)iii-v(-"vi")/8-10(-"12"), the petiole 2-5.5 cm, the interpinnal segments ± 1 - 2 cm, the ventral sulcus continuous (spicules 0); lfts oblong-eUiptic obtuse, minutely apiculate, the largest 6.5-11 x 3-5.5 mm, all weakly 3-nerved dorsally, the subcentric midrib 2-3-branched.
Peduncles solitary or 2-4 in the axil of contemporary lvs or some shortly pseudoracemose; capitula globose, prior to anthesis moriform, without filaments 6-7 mm diam., the flowers glabrous, white, 5-merous 10-androus; calyx deeply campanulate, weakly 5-ribbed, 1.5-1.7 mm, the deltate teeth ±0.2 mm; corolla 3.1-3.5 mm, the lobes ascending; filaments free, exserted 3—4 mm.
Pods ±2-3 per capitulum, the stipe 2-3 mm, the body broadly linear in profile 5 5-90 x 9-12 mm, straight or recurved, 6-10-seeded, the shallowly undulate puberulent replum 0.5-0.8 mm wide, the papery, brown or livid, almost plane, thinly puberulent or glabrate valves breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 8- 12 mm long. In thom-forest on the coastal plain and first foothiUs of Sa.
Madre Occidental, below 450 m, known only from s. Sinaloa and far w. Jalisco, Mexico.-H. X-IV(-?).
104.
Mimosa hondurana Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 169.
1928.-"Lancetilla Valley, Atlantida, Honduras, December, 1927 to March, 192%, Standley 54073.''- Holotypus, NY!; isotypus, F! = F Neg. 54763.
M. pseudopaniculata Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 169.
1928.-"Near Yajalon, Chiapas [Mexico], November 21, 1985, E. W. Nelson 5^06."-Holotypus, US!; clastotypus, NY! Coarse macrophyUidious forest vines 3 m upward, the stems and lf-stks armed with serial cat's-claw aculei or some terminal branchlets almost unarmed, variably villosulous and granular but esetose, the lfts pubemlent beneath or on both faces, marginally revolute.
Stipules linearsetiform 2-9 mm, not extemally nerved.
Leafformula ii-v/5-8, the petiole 2.5-4.5 cm, the longer interpinnal segments (± dilated distally) 1.5- 3 cm, the ventral sulcus bridged and often spiculate; lfts obliquely rhombic acute, the distal pair 15-35 X 8-18 mm, 3-nerved from pulvinule, the pinnately branched midrib arched forward.
Capitula globose, fasciculate, and forming an ample terminal efoliate panicle, prior to anthesis moriform, without filaments ±4 mm diam.; calyx campanulate denticulate 0.4-0.8 mm, glabrous; y/ow^r^ 4-merous 8-androus, all bisexual, white fragrant; corolla turbinate 2-2.3 cm, the membranous 1-nerved lobes plane; filaments briefly monadelphous (to 0.2 mm) around stipe of glabrous or villosulous ovary.
Pods ±1-4 per capitulum, the stipe 2-6 mm, the broad-linear body 50-90 x 11-12 mm, (5-)6-8-seeded, the replum scarcely 0.5 mm wide, either unarmed or randomly retro-aculeolate, the stiffly papery valves glabrous, the free-falling indehiscent articles 8-10 mm long. In submontane and disturbed woodlands, 300- 1250 m, extreme s. Mexico (Chiapas), Belize, Guatemala, and Honduras (Atlantida, Copan, Tegucigalpa).-n. (IX-)X-II. 105.
Mimosa malacophylla A. Gray, Boston J. Nat. Hist. 6(P1. lindheimer.
2): 182.
1850.- "On the Rio Grande, Texas, Mr. Charles Wright.
.
. near Monterey, Northem Mexico, by Dr. Gregg and Dr. Edwards .
.
. east of Rinconada, by Dr. Gregg in 1848."—Lectotypus (Isely, 1971b: 419): Gregg 207 from Rinconada, GH!; syntypi, Gregg in 1847, Edwards & Eaton 22 in 1846, annotated by Bentham, NY! M. malacophylla var. glabrata Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 423.
IS75.-''Berlandier, n. 815 and 2235."-Holotypus, Berlandier 815 = 2235, K (hb. Hook.,
s. loc.)!; isotypus, no. 815 e "San Fernando, Tamaulipas," NY! M. wootoni Standley, Contr. U.S. NaU.
Herb. 23: 364.
1922.—"Type from Hacienda Buena Vista, Tamaulipas (Wooton, June 14,1919.
.
.)."-Holotypus,US 9898281—Referred to M. malacophylla by Isely, 1973: 104.
Scandent or, when unsupported, diffuse, weakly fmticose subshrubs attaining 4.5 m, armed at least on main stems and on most If-axes with files of cat's-claw aculei 1.5-2.5 mm (random distal branchlets almost unarmed), the stems and foliage densely pilosulous with soft erect pallid hairs to 0.3 mm or minutely thinly puberulent, the broad thin-textured lfts facially either pilosulous, puberulent, or glabrous (but then minutely ciliolate), the inflorescence of ellipsoid or subglobose capitula either simply pseudoracemose or paniculate, either fully exserted from foliage or proximally foliate.
Stipules subulatesetiform 1-8 mm, 1-nerved.
Leaf formula iii-vi/ 4-7, the lf-stks (4-)5-16 cm, spiculate between pinna-pairs, the rachis of longer pinnae 2-4 cm; lfts subsymmetrically ovate, ovate-elliptic or (especially the distal pair) obovate, abruptly mucronulate or apiculate, attaining 7.5-14 x 4.5- 9 mm, 3-nerved dorsally, the midrib pinnately 3-5-branched on each side.
Peduncles (1-)2-5 per node, (5-)8-20 mm; capitula without filaments 5-14 X (4-)4.5-6.5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the pyriform-obovoid fl-buds silkypuberulent, the receptacle becoming 4-10 mm; pedicels 0.1-0.5 mm; flowers (4-)5-merous, but the androecium variously reduced to 5-10 filaments, and only 5-6 antheriferous; calyx campanulate 0.3-0.6 mm, the rim minutely denticulate and ciliolate; corolla 1.8-2.7 mm; filaments white, united at very base below stipe of ovary, exserted 4-4.5 mm; anthers ovate 0.4-0.6 mm, the connective sometimes minutely produced between anther-sacs.
Pods 1-6 per capitulum, the stipe 6-16 mm, the body in profile broad-linear 50-90 X 8-12.5 mm, falcately recurved, 4-10- seeded, the replum either unarmed or remotely aculeolate, shallowly constricted or almost straight, often vestigially puberulent, the glabrous or glabrate valves low-bullate over each seed, the indehiscent, free-falling articles 8-13 mm long. Shrub-thickets, hedges, and ditch-banks, below 400 m, locally common in the lower Rio Grande valley in Texas, downstream from Kinney County (Isely, 1973, map 34), thence s. through e. Coahuila and centr. Nuevo Leon to extratropical Tamaulipas, Mexico—Raspi Ila, raspa-huevos.
Mimosa malacophylla is notable especiaUy for its imperfect androecium and for the shape of the anthers.
It resembles M. hondurana in small calyx, but differs in much smaller, less oblique leaflets, in minutely pedicellate flowers, and in habitat and dispersal.
Mimosa sinaloensis, similar in general facies, differs in deeply campanulate calyx and lacks interpinnal spicules.
B(x).
Series F A G A R A C A N T H A E Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Fagaracanthae Bameby, ser. nov., e speciebus antillanis (insulis Cubae et Hispaniolae endemicis) inter se heteromorphis sed manifeste affinibus constans, vix a Rubicaulibus diversa sed foliorum rachi saepissime ad pinnamm insertionem aculeis geminis recurvis armato et staminum cycli interioris numero ± reducto peculiaris. — Sp. typica: M. fagaracantha Grisebach.
Haitimimosa Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 179.
1928.-Sp. typica: H. extranea (Bentham) Britton = Mimosa extranea Bentham.
Mimosa VII. Mornicolae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 146, in clave.
1928, nom. nud. Mimosa XXI. Fagaracanthae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 146, in clave.
1928, nom. nud. Either free-standing or sarmentose (when unsupported, humifuse), mostly microphyllidious shrubs and treelets, randomly armed at or between nodes and commonly at insertion of each pinna with recurved aculei (but occasional branches or lvs unarmed).
Indumentum of minute hairs and granular trichomes, sometimes almost 0, neither setose nor viscid.
Stipules subulate or setiform, often minute.
Leaf-formula of most spp. (i-)ii-x/(2-)3-23, but in M. extranea the lfts of many lvs suppressed or almost so and in that sp. and M. leonardii the If-rachis ± dilated or phyllodial; sulcus of If-stk either continuous or weakly bridged, exceptionally spiculate; larger lfts 2-9 (in M. fagaracantha to 16) mm long. Inflorescence of subglobose capitula, these either aU axillary or some pseudoracemose; flowers either 4- or 5-merous, mostly haploor imperfectly diplostemonous, the perfect stamens 4-8, the antepetalous (inner) set ± depleted; calyx 0.5-1 mm, minutely denticulate; corolla 1.5-3 mm; filaments either white or pink, free or minutely monadelphous at base.
Pods linear or broad-linear, sessile or shortly stipitate, 5-9.5 mm wide, the smooth or randomly aculeate replum 0.3- 0.6 mm diam., the valves breaking up into (4-)5- 9 free-falling segments.
Spp. seven, of savanna and bmsh-woodland below 800 m, endemic to Cuba and Hispaniola.
The Fagaracanthae form an obviously coherent group that must have differentiated in isolation on Cuba and Hispaniola, where several are narrowly confined to serpentine bedrock.
Collectively the Fagaracanthae are not separable from ser. Rubicaules by any single consistently diagnostic character, but are peculiar either for the prevalent pair of recurved aculei bome on leaf-stalks immediately below each pair of pinnae (and often repeated at tip of each pinna), or for irregular depletion of the inner cycle of stamens.
Neither character is universal in the series, but when the aculei are suppressed the androecium is imperfect, and when the androecium is perfectly diplostemonous the leaf-stalks are characteristically armed.
In Haiti a tendency for dilation of the leaf-stalk at the expense of leaflets, notably in M. leonardii, has culminated in true phyllodes in some branches of M. extranea.
All but one of the Fagaracanthae known by 1875 were included by Bentham in a heterogeneous assemblage of neotropical Rubicaules.
The imperfectly known M. extranea, then seemingly isolated but now clearly linked to more conventional Fagaracanthaehy way ofM. leonardii, was artificially associated with the herbaceous phyllodial Paucifoliatae of the Brazilian Planalto.
Britton and Rose (1928) separated the leafy Fagaracanthae into a diplostemonous and a haplostemonous group, apparently unaware of the variation in stamen number.
And Britton alone based the feeble genus Haitimimosa on M. extranea, despite evidence, already at hand, of purely phyllodial leaf-stalks and normally foliolate ones.
Bassler (1985) transferred M. fagaracantha, often haplostemonous, to sect. Mimosa.
Not accounted for herein is the obscure: Mimosa apleura Urban, Symb. antiU.
9: 441.
1928. -"[Cuba] Prov. Pinar del Rio prope Las Pozas in cuabales: \Ekman\ n. 17462 (ster.)."
— Holotypus, presumably +B; isotypus, sterile, S! This is described by Bassler (1985: 601), who saw fmit (Bisse & al. 48223) but no flowers, as a west-Cuban vicariant microspecies corresponding with the east-Cuban serpentine endemic M. ekmanii.
The differential characters, all overlapping, given in Bassler's key (1985: 594) do not inspire confidence in a specific distinction.
Conspectus of ser. Fagaracanthae Mimosa 106. parvifoliolata Liogier 107. diplacantha Bentham 108. domingensis (DeCandolle) Bentham 109. ekmanii \Jrhan 110. fagaracantha Grisebach 111. leonardii Britton & Rose 112. extranea Benthoxn Key to species of ser. Fagaracanthae 1.
Lf-stks dilated into longitudinaUy 3(-5)-nerved phyUodia 2.5-7 cm x (1.5-)2-6 mm, these sometimes bearing at apex a pair of very smaU and caducous 2-4-foholate pinnae; Haiti. .112.
M. extranea (p. 187).
1.
Lf-stks not at all or less dilated, in any case normally pinnate, the pinnae of larger lvs 2-13-jug.; Cuba and Hispaniola.
2.
Lfts obovate or obovate-elliptic, the longer ones 2-11 mm wide.
3.
Lf-formula ii-iv/2-7; e. Cuba and Haiti.
4.
Lfts palmately (4-)5-nerved and beyond mid-blade undulately obtusangulate or denticulate; e. Cuba 110.
M. fagaracantha (p. 185).
4.
Lfts weakly 1-3-nerved and entire.
5.
Lf-stks moderately dilated, each segment of rachis to 1-1.5 mm wide; lfts of distal pinnae 2-3(-4)-jug.; n.-w. Haiti 111.
M leonardii (p. 186).
5.
Lf-stks not dilated, less than 1 mm wide; lfts of distal pinnae 4-7-jug.; e. Cuba 109.
M. ekmanii (p. 184).
3.
Lf-formula vi-x(-xi)/5-l 1; widespread in Hispaniola 108.
M. domingensis (p. 183).
2.
Lfts linear or linear-oblong, 0.5-1.6 mm wide; Hispaniola only.
6.
Lf-formula vi-xiii/15-23; sarmentose shmbs to 3 m and more; rare in centr. (and perhaps n.) Dominican Republic 106.
M. parvifoliolata (p. 181).
6.
Lf-formula ii-iv/7-12(-13); bushy shrubs 0.3-1.5(-2) m; common in s.-w. Dominican Republic and s. Haiti 107.
M. diplacantha (p. 182).
106.
Mimosa parvifoliolata Liogier, Moscosoa 1(1): 22, fig. 1.
1976.-"Republica Dominicana: En manigua, Loma Mala, Maimon, alt. 500 m, 6 febrero 1974, Alain Liogier 21300 .
.
. id. 20870, en fmto."
—Lectotypus, Alain 21300, SDM!; isotypus, NY!; syntypi, 20870, NY! SDM! M. parvifoliolata sensu Liogier, 1985: 51, fig. lOlA- 11.
Sarmentose microphyUidious shrubs randomly armed on stems, both at and between some nodes, on lf-stks at insertion of pinna-pairs, and at or near tip of some pinna-rachises with sharply vulnerant recurved aculei 1-2 mm, the young branches and If-axes minutely pubemlent and granular, the small crowded thick-textured lfts bicolored, dark olivaceous sublustrous above, paler dull beneath, the globose capitula mostly fasciculate by 2-3 on brachyblasts subtended by hysteranthous lvs, in praefloration and eariy anthesis forming an efoliate virgate panicle or pseudoraceme, but the fmits maturing on leafy branches.
Stipules subulate-setiform 0.5-2.5 mm, becoming dry deciduous.
Leafstalks of primary lvs 3-6 cm, of brachyblastic ones shorter (no further described), the petiole including wrinkled pulvinus 5-9 mm, at middle 0.5-0.7 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 5-7 mm, the open ventral sulcus continuous (spicules 0); pinnae 6-13- jug., a little decrescent proximally, the rachis of distal ones 11-22 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.7 mm; Ifts of longer pinnae 15-23-jug., scarcely graduated, the first pair ±0.5 mm distant from minute paraphyllidia 0.1-0.2 mm, the blades linear or Unear-oblong from obtusely auriculate base, obtuse at apex, the longer ones 2- 4 X 0.5-0.9 mm, 3.3-4.5 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, faintly 1 -nerved beneath by the subcentric simple midrib.
Peduncles ±1-1.5 cm; capitula plumply ovoid, without filaments ±5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds gray-puberulent, the receptacle becoming 3-4 mm long; bracts linear-spatulate ±0.7 mm, caducous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, apparently all bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.7 mm, the rim minutely denticulate; corolla vase-shaped 1.5-2 mm, whitish or pinkish; filaments whitish (?), free, exserted ± 2 mm.
Pods 2-5 per capitulum, the body in profile falcately broad-linear ±40-55 x 8-9 mm, 5-8-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 1.5-2 mm and at apex into an erect cusp 2.5-4 mm, the unarmed, shallowly constricted replum 0.4 mm wide, the papery castaneous lustrous, microscopically puberulent and granular valves low-colliculate over each seed, breaking up when ripe into free-falling articles 7-10 mm long; seeds not seen.
On serpentine hillsides, 300-500 m, known with certainty only from upper valley of rio Maimon in s.-e. depto. La Vega, Dominican Republic, but perhaps also (Liogier 27126, NY, sterile) near sea level on the n. coast at Luperon, depto. Puerto Plata.-H. II-III(-?).
Mimosa parvifoliolata closely resembles M. domingensis in habit, stature and armament, but is clearly different in leaf-formula and small size of leaffets.
107.
Mimosa diplacantha Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30:424.
1875.-" 'Antilles,' Herb. Berol. from Herb. Mus. Par."
, the collector not given.—Holotypus, ^B; no isotypus at K.— Wrongly equated by Urban, Symb. antill.
2: 267.
1900 8L 8: 259.
1920 with M. domingensis.
M. domingensis sensu Rose & Leonard, 1927: 257; Britton & Rose, 1928: 164; Liogier, Moscosoa 1(1): 24 (in clave).
1976; 1985: 49; non Bentham.
Stiffly branched xeromorphic microphyUidious, sometimes drought-deciduous shrubs 3-14(- 20) dm tall, depressed in coastal barrens but in inland thickets erect and bushy, the annotinous trunks gray-brown, the young branchlets brownstriped lengthwise, either wholly unarmed or (more commonly) randomly armed at and sometimes also between nodes with sharp recurved dark-tipped infrastipular aculei 0.5-2(-2.5) mm, the lf-stks all, some, or none similarly armed on dorsal rib and at insertion of some pairs of pinnae (but the pinna-rachis unarmed), the homotinous growth usually minutely puberulent and lividgranular throughout but sometimes glabrous, the plane thick-textured olivaceous concolorous lfts glabrous faciaUy, minutely cUiolate, the rather loosely fld, globose or ellipsoid capitula either solitary or 2-3-nate in primary If-axils or often also on short leafy brachyblasts.
Stipules stiffly erect subulate-setiform 0.5-3 mm, tardily deciduous.
Leafstalks of primary lvs (1.5-)2-6 cm, of some brachyblastic ones shorter (no further described), the petiole 5-14(-l 7) mm, the longer interpinnal segments 7-14 mm, the ventral groove bridged between pinnae but only exceptionally (Holdridge 1167, ex parte, NY) spiculate; pinnae (1-)2-4-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 8-18(-20) mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.7-2.1 (-2.5) mm; lfts of distal pinnae (6-)7-12(-13)-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the first pair 0.4-1.3 mm distant from erect paraphyllidia 0.1-0.3 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from obtusangulate base, obtuse or obscurely mucronulate at apex, the larger ones 3-6 x 0.8-1.5(-l.6) mm, (3.3-)3.5- 4.5 times as long as wide, all almost veinless except for slender midrib dorsally discolored but immersed.
Peduncles (6-)9-25(-40) mm; capitula without filaments 4.5-6(-7) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the ff-buds gray-puberulent, the receptacle 2.5-6 mm long; bracts linearoblanceolate 0.2-0.6 mm, puberulent, caducous; pedicels 0.1-0.6 mm; flowers 4-5-merous, 5-8-, commonly 6-androus, all bisexual; calyx narrowly vase-shaped (0.6-)0.7-1.1 mm, minutely puberulent extemally, the teeth at most 0.2 mm; corolla turbinate-vase-shaped, cuneately narrowed at base, 2-2.8(-3) mm, the plane membranous recurving lobes 0.8-1.3 X 0.7-1.1 mm, pinkish when dry; filaments white, free, exserted 2-3(-3.5) mm; ovary substipitate, glabrous or pubemlent.
Pods 1-10 per capitulum subsessile, in profile undulately linear, either straight or more often falcate (16-)25-34(-45) x 5-5.5 mm, (4-) 5-8(10) seeded, the shallowly constricted unarmed replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, the papery purplish-brown or livid valves low-colliculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling indehiscent articles (3.5-)4-5.5 mm long, the replum and valves alike usually minutely pubemlent and granular, scarcely venulose, sometimes glabrous; seeds (few seen) plumply discoid ±2.7-3.3 mm diam., the fuscous testa sublustrous.
In dry thickets and on exposed limestone ridges and fiats, from the seashore to ±250 m, endemic to s.-w. Hispaniola: in Dominican RepubUc w.-ward along the coast and foothUls from neighborhood of Bani, in Haiti w. through the basin of Etang Saumatre to the bay of Port-auPrince.-H. II-V, VIII-IX, perhaps whenever conditions are favorable.
See discussion under M. domingensis, next following.
108.
Mimosa domingensis (DeCandolle) Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 409.
1842, based on Acacia domingensis DeCandolle, Prodr. 2:464.
1825.—"in Sancto-Domingo. (Bertero .
.
. v.s. comm. a cl.
Balbis.)"—Holotypus, G-DC! = F Neg. 33450.
M. momicola Urban, Symb. antiU.
7: 228.
1912.— "Hab. in Haiti in Mome Bonpere [probably Mome Bobere, ± 12 km n.-e. from Gros Mome in the Chaine de Plaisance . .. 600 m alt., m. Jun. [1901] flor.: Buchn.
685."-Holotypus, +B; isotypi, GH! IJ!; photo + fragments, NY! US (misit Urban 26.
VII.1926)! M. buchii Urban, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 22: 89.
1925.—"Hab. in Haiti septentrionali prope Moustique .
.
.
250 m alt., m. Jul. flor.: Buch no. 2116."—Holotypus, +B; isotypus, IJ! M. farisii Leonard ex Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23: 164.
1928.-"Nigua, Santo Domingo, July, 1921, James A. Faris 4^7."—Holotypus, US!; clastotypus, NY!—Equated by Rose & Leonard, 1927, with H. momicola.
M. azuensis Britton ex Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23: 164.
1928.—"Azua, Santo Domingo, March 17, 1913, Rose, Fitch & Russell 599^."-Holotypus, NY!; isotypus, US!—Equated by Rose & Leonard, 1927, with M. momicola.
Acacia tamarindifolia sensu Grisebach, Cat. pi. Cub.
82.
1866; non Willdenow.
Mimosa polyancistra sensu Bentham, 1875: 422.—"Cultivated in Mr. Chapy's garden at Havannah from the West Indies, MLane [382, K!]"—Non M. polyancistra Bentham, I.e., vera (Pavoniana).
Mimosa domingensis sensu Bentham, 1875: 424.
M. momicola sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 152; Rose & Leonard, 1927: 258; Liogier, 1985: 51.
M buchii sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 152; Liogier, 1985: 48.
M. azuensis sensu Liogier, 1985: 48.
M. farisii sensu Liogier, 1985: 50.
Scrambling shrubs 2-10 m, sarmentose in closed bmsh or woodland communities but when lacking support forming impenetrable tangles, commonly armed randomly on stems at and sometimes also below nodes, on lf-stks immediately below insertion of some or all pairs of pinnae, and commonly at tip of all or many pinna-rachises with vulnerant recurved dark-tipped aculei 0.5-2 mm, but in some samples the aculei few or lacking, the fuscous striped homotinous stems, If-axes and peduncles minutely pubemlent and microscopically Uvid-granular, the bicolored lfts glabrous dark green sublustrous above, paler dull beneath, the subglobose or ovoid capitula 1-3-nate in axils of primary lvs or, in praefloration or early anthesis, shortly pseudoracemose at end of hysteranthously leafy branchlets.
Stipules erect or (when long) incurved-ascending, narrowly subulate or linear-setiform 1- 6 X 0.2-0.6 mm, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks of primary lvs 3.5-8.5(-10) cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus (4-)5-12(-16) X 0.6-1.2 mm, the longer interpinnal segments (5-)6-10 (-14) mm, the ventral groove continuous or obscurely bridged between pinnae but spicules 0; pinnae of primary lvs 5-10(-l l)-jug., of occasional lvs on secondary branchlets fewer (no further described), subequilong or subdecrescent at one or both ends of If-stk, the forwardly curved rachis 12-25(-37) mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-4(-6) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 5- 6 (in Nord-Ouest, Artibonite), 7-9 (in San Cristobal, Azua) or -11-jug. (in Espaillat), a little decrescent proximally, the first pair 0.7-2.5 mm distant from ascending subulate paraphyllidia 0.1-0.5 mm, the plane or ventrally subconvex blades varying from narrowly oblong or oblongeUiptic to elliptic-obovate from shallowly semicordate or obliquely obtusangulate base, broadly rounded or subemarginate at apex, the longer ones 5-8.5 x (1.8-)2-3.5(-5) mm, (1.6-)2-3 times as long as wide, all almost imperceptibly veined above, beneath weakly finely 2-4-nerved from pulvinule, the scarcely displaced midrib faintly 1-3-branched on each side, the anterior (sometimes wanting) and inner posterior nerves weakly anastomatizing beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles 6- 18, rarely 25-30 mm; capitula without filaments ±(3.5-)4-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the narrowly claviform receptacle 2.5-4.5 mm long; bracts minute pubemlent, caducous; flowers-whitish, 4-5-merous 4-10-androus; calyx campanulate, extemaUy pubemlent, 0.7-1.1 mm, the deltate teeth 0.1-0.15 mm; corolla vaseshaped 1.9-4.1 mm, the 1-nerved lobes 0.8-1.2 X 0.6-0.8 mm; filaments either free or obscurely connate at very base, exserted 2-5 mm.
Pods 1- 3 per capitulum, subsessile or narrowed at base into a stipe to 3 mm, the body in profile broadly linear, falcately incurved 35-50 x 7_9(_iO) mm, 6-8-seeded, the unarmed, shallowly constricted replum 0.3-0.5 mm wide, produced as an erect terminal cusp 3-5 mm, the papery reddish-brown or ultimately fuscous, microscopically pubemlent and weakly venulose valves breaking up when ripe into free-falling indehiscent articles 5.5-8 mm long; seeds plumply discoid 3.3-4.2 mm diam., the smooth brown testa sublustrous.
In xeromorphic scmb and woodland, on limestone and sometimes on serpentine, mostly between sea-level and 300 m but attaining 700(-?) m in n.-w. Haiti, scattered over Hispaniola from dep.
Nord-Ouest s. to dep.
Ouest in Haiti and e. in Dominican Republic to deptos.
Espaillat and San Cristobal.-n. II-IV, VII-IX, probably in other months.
Mimosa domingensis is the coarse trailing or sarmentose member and M. diplacantha the dwarf or bushy microphyllidious member of a closely related pair of species endemic to Hispaniola, the names of which have long been confused.
The identity of the first is known from the surviving holotypus of Acacia domingensis DC.
The holotypus ofM. diplacantha, now destroyed, was available to Urban at Berlin in his studies of AntiUean Mimosa, and at one point (1920: 259) he explicitly associated it with Rose & al. 4018 from Azua, a specimen of the dwarf species.
Taking into account Urban's powers of minute observation I regard this as powerful indirect proof of the identity of M. diplacantha, bome out, furthermore, by the protologue.
Urban, however, identified this material as M. domingensis.
In consequence, the tme M. domingensis, as new collections from Hispaniola reached Urban in Berlin and Britton in New York, was naturally thought to be undescribed.
Its unarmed or weakly armed states were distinguished as M. mornicola by Urban and as M. azuensis by Britton & Rose, and the strongly armed state as M. buchii by Urban and as M. farisii by Britton & Rose.
A peculiar feature of both M. domingensis and M. diplacantha is the variable number of stamens, the 4-5-merous flowers varying from fully diplostemonous to exactly haplostemonous, but most falling somewhere between the two.
Mimosa mornicola andM. buchii, which Urban had described as having four or five stamens per flower, were for this reason narrowly interpreted by Britton & Rose as members of sect. Eu-mimosa and transferred from their natural position next to M. fagaracantha in sect. Habbasia to a specially provided ser. Mornicolae in sect. Eu-mimosa.
I am indebted to Dr. T. Zanoni for identifying Buch's "Mome Bonpere" in Haiti, type-locality of M. mornicola.
The isotype of M. buchii that survives at Kingston, Jamaica is now somewhat fragmentary but seems to consist of the tips of flowering branches and consequently does not show any primary stem leaves.
The largest leaves on the specimen have four pairs of pinnae, which suggests M. leonardii, but the leaf-stalk is not dilated as in that species.
109.
Mimosa ekmanii Urban, Symb. antill.
9: 440.
1928 (Mar).-"[Cuba.] Prov. Oriente in Sierra de Nipe in saxis ad aquas cadentes Rio Piloto cr.
700 m alt., Sept. [1922] fmct.: [E. L. Ekman] n. 15174."—Holotypus, ^B; isotypus, NY! (?) M. apleura Urban, Symb. antiU.
9: 441.
1928 (Mar).—"[Cuba.] Prov. Pinar del Rio prope Las Pozas in cuabales: [E. L. Ekman].
17462 (ster.)."—No typus seen.
M. moaensis Britton & Wilson, N. Amer. Fl.
23: 171.
1928 (Dec).—"Moa Bay, east of Rio Moa, Oriente, Cuba, January, 1911 [J. A.] Shafer <9i5i."-Holotypus, NY (2 sheets)!—Equated with M. ekmanii by Bassler, 1985: 600.
M. ekmanii sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 164; Leon & Alain, Fl.
Cuba 2: 248.
1951; Bassler, 1985: 600.
M. moaensis sensu Le6n & Alain, Fl.
Cuba 2: 247.
1951.
M. apleura sensu Bassler, 1985: 594 (in clave), 601.
Prickly sarmentose or, when lacking support, humifuse and adventitiously rooting, softly woody shrubs attaining 2.5 m, armed at and between stem-nodes, on lf-stks and on rachis of most pinnae with sharp recurved brown-tipped aculei l-3(-4) mm, the young branchlets, If-axes and peduncles either glabrous or pubemlent, minutely granular, the firm bicolored lfts always glabrous, the convex upper face sublustrously dark green, bmnnescent when dry, the concave lower face paler, microscopically punctate, the small globose capitula solitary and geminate in the axil of contemporary lvs, the fmits immersed in foliage.
Stipules erect, subulate 1-4 mm, 1-nerved, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 1.5-4.5 cm, often retroarcuate, the petiole 7-13(-l 5) mm, the interpinnal segments 7-11 mm, the ventral groove either continuous or weakly bridged between pinna-pairs, the bridge sometimes spiculate; pinnae (1-)2^(-5)-jug., a little accrescent upward, often recurved from primary axis, the rachis of distal pair ll-19(-22) mm, 2-3-aculeate at tip, the longer interfoUolar segments 2- 4 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 4-8(-9)-jug., subdecrescent proximally, the blades eUiptic or oblongeUiptic from semicordate base, obtuse, the penultimate pair 3.5-8 X 1.8-3.7 mm, 1.7-2.8 times as long as wide, all weakly (2-)3-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib simple or faintly 1-2-branched, the posterior and anterior nerves obscurely brochidodrome beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles 1.5-2.6 cm; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds glabrous; bracts linear-spatulate 0.5-0.7 mm; flowers 4-merous 5-8-androus, the antepetalous stamens variously reduced in size or number; calyx campanulate 0.7-0.9 mm, minutely denticulate; corolla turbinate but narrowed at base into a short tube, 2-2.6 mm, the ovate-triangular 1-nerved lobes ±1 x 0.8 mm; filaments united below the short-stipitate ovary into a short stemonozone, exserted 2.5-3 mm, not seen fresh but probably lilac-pink.
Pods to 4 per capitulum, in profile broadly linear, straight or falcate 30-50 x (5-)6-9.5 mm, (4-)5-8-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 1-2 mm and at apex into a slender, erect or declined cusp, the shallowly constricted replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, either unarmed or randomly armed along midrib with a few recurved aculei 1-1.5 mm, the dark brown or purplish-castaneous lustrous, delicately venulose valves breaking up when ripe into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles ±5.5-8.5 mm long; seeds (few seen) discoid ± 3 - 3.7 mm diam., the testa fuscous duU.
On open rocky hillsides, in pine-barrens on serpentine, and on rocky stream banks, ascending from near sea-level to 700 m, endemic to Cuba, best known from the eastem quarter of the island in prov. Oriente, apparently disjunct (M. apleura, perhaps varietally distinct) in prov. Pinar del Rio.-Fl.
IV-VIII(-?).
Mimosa ekmanii differs from closely related M. domingensis in leaf-formula and in dispersal.
Its pods are described both by Urban and by Britton as unarmed, but almost all examples seen, including the isotypus at NY, in fact have a few prickles scattered along the midrib of the replum.
The typus of M. moaensis, consisting of sterile pieces of what Shafer described as "creeping shmbs, forming large mats," has essentially the foliage of M ekmanii and appears to be no more than a growth-form of the same species.
The status of M. apleura is uncertain.
Bassler (1985, key) considered it distinct from typical M. ekmanii in slightly more numerous and slightly narrower leaflets, and in a slightly narrower pod, but the measurements overlap.
I have found in east-Cuban material of M. ekmanii leaf-formulae of (1-)2-4(-5)/4-8 and leaflets 1.8-3.7 mm wide.
The corresponding figures for M. apleura are "3(-5)/6-8(-9)" and "1-2 mm."
The diflference in pod-width given by Bassler is 6-8 mm in M. ekmanii and 5-7 mm in M. apleura.
110.
Mimosa fagaracantha Grisebach, Cat. pi. Cub.
81.
1866.-"Cubaor. (Wr[ight] 2390)."
- Holotypus, GOET, not seen; isotypi, GH! NY (fragm)! YU! M. pulverulenta Urban, Symb. antiU.
9: 439.
1928.- "[Cuba.] Prov. Oriente prope Guantanamo ad stationem olim navalem, m. Sept. flor. et fruct.: [Ekman] n. 2918."
—Holotypus, +B; isotypus, 25.
IX.1914, S! M. fagaracantha sensu Bentham, 1875: 422; Britton & Rose, 1928: 164; Leon & Alain, Fl.
Cuba 2: 248.
1951; Bassler, 1985: 603, Karte 2.
M. pulverulenta sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 165; Leon & Alain, Fl.
Cuba 2: 248.
1951; Bassler, 1985: 604, Karte 2.
Stiffly branched shrubs attaining 2(-?) m, akin to M. domingensis but diflferent in lf-formula and venation of lfts, usuaUy armed at most (all) nodes, at insertion of pinnae and at tip of pinna-rachises with recurved aculei l-3.5(-4) mm but sometimes unarmed, the young stems and If-axes minutely but sometimes densely pubemlent and granular, the broad venulose lfts glabrous bicolored, lustrous dark-olivaceous brunnescent above, paler beneath, the globose capitula solitary and fasciculate by 2-5 in axils of hysteranthous lvs, in praefforation pseudoracemose and shortly exserted from foliage, the lf-stks and lfts readily disjointing when dry.
Stipules erect, slenderly subulate 0.5-1.5 mm, deciduous.
Leafstalks (10-)20-38 mm, the petiole (4-)8-20 x 0.5-0.8 mm, the interpinnal segments about as long, the open ventral groove bridged between pinnae and often spiculate; pinnae 2-3(-4)-jug., the further pair longest, all commonly recurved, the rachis 16-28 mm, grooved ventrally and charged between each pair of Ift-pulvinules with a small spicule, the interfoliolar segments 5-13 mm; lfts of distal pair of pinnae 3-4-jug., scarcely graduated, the blades obliquely obovate from shallowly semicordate base, obtuse or obscurely apiculate, undulately obtusangulate or denticulate beyond mid-blade, the distal pair 6-16 x 4- 11 mm, 1.2-1.5 times as long as wide, all palmately (4-)5-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib 1-2-branched, the anterior and posterior inner nerves produced well beyond midblade, there either expiring or brochidodrome, the primary and often a weak secondary venulation prominulous on both faces, especially so beneath.
Peduncles 6-13 mm; capitula without filaments 3.5-4.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the ff-buds gray-pubemlent; bracts linear-spatulate less than 1 mm, caducous or sub- ^ersistent; flowers 4(-5)-merous, 4-5-androus, the four antesepalous stamens always present, a fifth short one (perhaps sometimes more, not seen but implied by authors) antepetalous; calyx narrowly campanulate 0.8-1 mm, extemally pubemlent, the triangular teeth ±0.2 mm; coroUa vase-shaped 2-2.3 mm, the ovate erect 1-nerved lobes 0.6- 0.8 X 0.5 mm; filaments free, pink, exserted ±3 mm; ovary short-stipitate pubemlent.
Pods (little known) undulate linear in profile 30-40 x 5-7 mm, 7-9-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 3-5 mm, the smooth or randomly retro-aculeate replum ±0.4 mm wide, shallowly or obscurely constricted between seeds, the papery valves thinly pubemlent or glabrate, minutely granular, breaking up when ripe into free-falling articles ±4-5 mm long; seeds not seen.
In savannas at low elevations, scattered through centr. and e. Cuba, from Matanzas and s. Las Villas (Sancti-Spiritus; Trinidad) e. to Oriente (Nipe Bay and Guantanamo).—Fl.
VI-XII. 111.
Mimosa leonardii Britton & Rose ex Rose & Leonard, J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 17:256.1927. - "Type [US] no. 1,300,376 .
.
. on a dry bank of the Puilboreau Road near Ennery, Haiti, altitude 350 meters, January 22, 1926, by E. C. Leonard (n. 9105)."-Holotypus, US!; isotypus, NY! M. leonardii sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 163.
Shrubs resembling sympatric M. extranea in habit but the lf-stks less dilated and the developed pinnae more numerous (in these characters resembling M. domingensis), armed at the nodes and immediately below the pulvinus of each pinna with stout recurved fuscous aculei 2-4 mm, the young stems and peduncles minutely puberulent and granular, the thick-textured lfts glabrous, the globose capitula 2-3-nate in axils of expanded lvs.
Stipules erect subulate 0.4-0.8 mm, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks (2-)4-6 cm, the petiole and one or two interpinnal segments each ±2-2.5 cm, dorsiventrally compressed but shallowly concave ventrally, not evidently or weakly ribbed, each broadened upward and becoming 1-1.5 mm wide; pinnae 2-4-jug., the rachis 5- 13 mm, either unarmed or occasionally 1-2-aculeate below distal pair of lfts, the interfoliolar segments 2.5-5 mm; lfts 2-3-jug., accrescent upward, the first pair 1-2 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia obsolete), the blades broadly elliptic from semicordate base, rounded apically, the distal pair 6-8 x 3^.5 mm, 1.3-1.75 times as long as wide, the venation immersed on both faces, the midrib and 1 posterior nerve sometimes faintly discolored dorsally.
Peduncles 7-8 mm; capitula globose, prior to anthesis moriform, the sessile ff-buds pubemlent; bracts minute caducous; flowers 4-5-merous, 5-6-androus; calyx campanulate 0.5-0.7 mm, minutely toothed, finely pubemlent extemaUy; corolla vaseshaped 1.8-2.3 mm, the spreading ovate lobes 0.7-0.9 X 0.6-0.7mm, when five, two irregularly coalescent; filaments whitish, free, exserted 2.5- 3 mm; ovary pubemlent.
Pods (as deduced from marcescent repla) subsessile, linear falcate ±45 X 6 mm, 8(?-10)-seeded.
In habitat not recorded, to be expected in dry bmsh-woodland associated with or near to M. extranea, known only from the type-locality near Ennery, dep. de I'Artibonite, Haiti.—R. I-II(-?).
The type-collection of M. leonardii differs markedly from M. extranea, which was collected nearby, also by E. C. Leonard, in normally pinnate leaves and narrower, but still obviously transversely dUated leaf-stalk.
The leaffets, though fewer in number, are almost those of M. domingensis, and it seems possible that M. leonardii is described from an individual hybrid M. domingensis X extranea.
While M. domingensis is widespread in Haiti, it is not yet recorded from the immediate neighborhood of Ennery.
Observation of M. leonardii in the field is needed to clarify its taxonomic status.
112.
Mimosa extranea Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 433.
1875.-"San Domingo, communicated by Jacquemont to the Beriin herbarium."
—Holotypus, collected (Urban, Symb. antiU.
3: 106.
1902) near Gonaives in Haiti by French vice-consul Prax, +B.—No isotypus found, but the protologue unmistakable.—//«zY/m/mo5fl extranea (Bentham) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. H. 23: 179.
1928.
Fig.
8.
M. extranea sensu Urban, Symb. antiU.
2: 268.
1900; 8: 259, 1920; Rose & Leonard, 1927: 256; Liogier, 1985: 49.
Stiflfly densely branched shrubs or treelets 1.5- 3 m with most or all lf-stks dilated into subcoriaceous linear simple phyUodia, unarmed or randomly armed at some nodes and at tip or on margins (exceptionally on midrib) of some phyllodia with recurved aculei 0.5-1.5 mm, the young growth minutely pubemlent and minutely lividgranular, the globose capitula solitary and paired in axils of primary lvs and of smaller lvs on axillary branchlets.
Stipules subulate 0.2-0.5 mm, caducous.
Leafstalks transversely dilated 25- 60(-70) X (1.5-)2-6 mm, cuneately attenuate at base, obtuse-mucronulate at apex, commonly 3- or the broader ones 5-nerved, all without lfts or some when young with a terminal pair of pinnae, these each 2- or rarely 4-foliolate, their rachis 2- 7 mm, the firm plane glabrous lfts eUiptic obtuse ± 2.5-5.5x1.5-3, veinless, caducous.
Peduncles 6-38 mm; capitula without filaments ±5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse ffbuds gray-pubemlent; flowers 4-5(one seen by Bentham reportedly 3)-merous diplostemonous, all bisexual; calyx narrowly campanulate 0.8-1 X 0.5 mm, pubemlent extemally, the triangular teeth ±0.2 mm; corolla tmmpet-shaped 2.4-3 mm, the spreading ovate pinkish nerveless lobes 0.8-1.3 X 0.5-0.7 mm; filaments white, united at very base to corolla, exserted 2.5-3 mm; ovary pubemlent.
Pods ±2-5 per capitulum, subsessile, cuneately contracted at base, in profile sinuately linear 30-45 x 6-6.5 mm, 6-8-seeded, the shaUowly constricted replum 0.3-0.5 mm wide, produced at apex into an erect cusp 1.5^ mm, either smooth or randomly armed with few recurved aculei 0.5-1.5 mm, the stiflRiy papery lustrous redor purple-brown glabrous valves low-colliculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, tardily dehiscent articles 4.5-5.5 mm long; seeds discoid ±3 mm diam., the testa dull brown.
In xeromorphic shmb communities, near sealevel to 650(-?) m, locally abundant in departements du Nord-Ouest and de I'Artibonite in n.- w. Haiti.-Fl.
XI-I, VI-? Bentham saw only a small branchlet of this curious Haitian endemic and, probably not aware that it is a shmb of considerable stature, mistakenly associated it with the weak herbaceous M. paucifolia and M. phyllodinea native to the Brazilian Planalto.
It appears certain that M. extranea is related closely and directly to compatriot Fagaracanthae such as M. domingensis, to which it is firmly linked by M. leonardii.
Loss of leaflets and compensatory expansion ofthe leaf-stalk has occurred independently in so many genera of Leguminosae, both woody and herbaceous, that it would be absurd to accord it generic recognition in the absence of supporting characters.
Thus, Haitimimosa is one of Britton's less felicitous proposals; H. extranea has flowers, fmits and even random foliaceous leaves entirely typical of Mimosa.
B(xi).
Series BAHAIVIENSES Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Bahamenses Barneby, stat. et nom. nov. Pteromimosa Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 171, pro gen.
1928.—Sp. typica: Pteromimosa bahamensis (Bentham) Britton = Mimosa bahamensis Bentham.
Xerophytic microphyllous, potentially arborescent shrubs, armed at or below stem-nodes with recurved infrastipular aculei and rusty-pilosulous-tomentulose, eglandular, the inflorescence of globose capitula exserted from foliage.
Stipules subulate, extemally nerveless.
Leaf-formula ii-iv/(3-)4-9, the If-stk espiculate, the larger lfts 3.5-6 mm.
Flowers sessile 4(-5)-merous, glabrous except for minutely ciliolate calyx, this campanulate ± 1 mm; filaments free.
Pods commonly stipitate, in profile broad-linear or lineareUiptic 6-9-seeded, the replum bearing on its dorsal rib a wide crestlike, lacerate-dentate wing composed of confluent broad-based setaculei; dehiscence craspedial.
Sp. one, of far e. tropical Mexico and adj. Gua- 3 mm Icm.
FIG. 8.
Mimosa extranea Bentham.
A. Fruiting branchlet.
B. Phyllodal leaf-stalk.
C. Dilated leaf-stalk with one pair of pinnae.
D. Seed. (A and D from Leonard 8828; B from Leonard 13525; C from Ekman 9444.) temala and Belize, and disjunct on the Bahama Islands.
Mimosa bahamensis was described by Bentham from ffowering material and associated with M. mollis in a loosely defined ser. Acanthocarpae, in which context the msty pilose-tomentulose indumentum, mostly tetramerous ffowers, and lowland Gulf-Caribbean dispersal marked it as exceptional.
Its most distinctive character, unknown to Bentham, is the marginally crested fmit, in which a fringe of broad-based setae arising from the dorsal rib of the replum merges into a continuous or randomly intermpted, lacerate or denticulate wing.
A similarly crested fmit is found in M. lacerata of upland central Mexico, but the ffowers of this arise from brachyblasts along annotinous branches, not from contemporary leafaxils, the ffowers are pentamerous and silky-pubescent, and the pod-valves fall from the replum in one piece.
It seems likely that the replum-crest of M. lacerata, a species closely akin to the polymorphic M. aculeaticarpa, is independently derived.
113.
Mimosa bahamensis Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 408.
1842.-"Bahamas, [Swainson in] Herb. Hooker.)."—Holotypus, K! — Pteromimosa bahamensis (Bentham) Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. H. 23: 171.
1928.
M. hemiendyta Rose & Robinson, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 8: 32.
1903.-"Collected by E. A. Goldman, at Apagote, near Yohaltun, State ofCampeche [Mexico], December 31, 1900 (n. 513)."-Holotypus, US!; isotypi (fragm.) GH! NYl—Pteromimosa hemiendyta (Rose & Robinson) Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23: 172.
1928.—Equated with M. bahamensis by Rudd, Phytologia 18: 143, figs. 1-2.
1969.
M. bahamensis sensu Grisebach, Fl.
Brit.
W. I. 219.
1864; Bentham, 1875: 422; J. G. Baker in Hooker, Icones pi. 1802.
1889; Britton « f e MiUspaugh, Bahama fl. 162.
1920; CorreU & CorreU, R. Bahama Archipelago 665, fig. 273.
1982.
M. hemiendyta sensu Standley, 1922: 363; Field Mus. Nat. Hist. Bot. Ser. 9:279.
1930; LundeU, Veg. Peten 63.
1937; Standley & Steyermark, Fl.
Guatemala 5: 57.
1946.
Stiflfly branched microphyllidious shrubs and bushy treelets mostly 2-4.5 m, rarely attaining 6-9 m, randomly armed at or below nodes with stout recurved infrastipular aculei l-2.5(-3) mm, the old defoUate branches ashen, the new branchlets, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence densely pilosulous-tomentulose with msty or partly gray. entangled filamentous hairs to 0.2-0.4 mm, the firm plane lfts strongly bicolored, above dark green or glaucescent, beneath paler olive-green or brownish, either fully glabrous, or facially glabrous but minutely ciliolate, or thinly pubemlent on one or on both faces, the globose capitula solitary and 2-3-nate in axil of hysteranthous lvs, in praefloration and young anthesis forming a few-branched pyramidal panicle of pseudoracemes exserted 0.5-2 dm from foliage, but the fmits immersed.
Stipules erect, firm, subulate or narrowly triangular-subulate 1-3(-3.5) x 0.3-1 mm dorsally tomentulose like stem, becoming dry deciduous.
Leaf-stalks of fully expanded lvs (0.6-)l-3.5(-^) cm, the petiole (3-)4-l 3(-20) mm, at middle 0.4-0.7 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 2-7 mm, the narrow ventral sulcus weakly bridged between pinna-pairs but espiculate; pinnae 2-4-, of most lvs exactly 3- or 4-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 8-24 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments (1.5-)2-4(-5) mm; lfts of further pinnae in Bahamas (3-)4-6-, on mainland 6-9-jug., distally accrescent, the first pair (0.5-)0.7-1.5 mm distant from erect, subulate or narrowly eUiptic green paraphyllidia 0.2-0.5 mm, the blades rhombicobovate or broadly oblong from obliquely tmncate base, obtuse or obtuse-apiculate, the penultimate pair 3.5-6 x 2-4 mm, 1.4-2.l(-2.3)times as long as wide, all veinless (except for faint discoloration) above, beneath 1-3-nerved from pulvinule, the slender, scarcely displaced midrib prominulous proximally, becoming faint or expiring distally, the one posterior and sometimes one anterior nerve expiring near or short of midblade.
Peduncles 7-15 mm; capitula without filaments 5.5-6.5 mm diam., the plumply obovoid fl-buds glabrous; receptacle pilose; bracts oblanceolate 0.6-1.2 X 0.2-0.3 mm, pubemlent, tardily deciduous; flowers 4(-5)-merous diplostemonous, all bisexual; calyx campanulate 1-1.3 mm, the obtuse teeth broader than long, 0.1-0.3 mm, minutely ciliolate with filiform or partly granular trichomes; corolla vase-shaped 2.6-3 mm, the ovate 1 -nerved, apicaUy thickened and shallowly concave lobes 0.8-1.1 x 0.7-0.9 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 3-4.5 mm; ovary rufous-pilosulous.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, in profile broadly linear or linear-elliptic 45-65 mm long and including the marginal crests (9-) 10-15 mm wide, 6-8(-9)-seeded, cuneately attenuate at base into a stipe (0-)l-8(-9) mm. cuspidate at apex, the body 7-9 mm and the replum 0.4-0.65 mm wide, the latter charged along its dorsal rib with laterally compressed setae confluent into a continuous (rarely intermpted), denticulate or lacerate wing 2-3.5 mm wide, the body, replum and wing alike densely mfous-tomentulose overall and sometimes in addition minutely granular, the valves becoming stiffly papery brown, breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles (5-)5.5-8 mm long; seeds discoid 4-5.2 x 3.5-5 mm, the testa fuscous dull.
In bmsh woodland, mostly on limestone, below 200 m, of bicentric range: Yucatan Peninsula in Yucatan, adj. Campeche and Quintana Roo, Mexico, s. into n. Belize and adj. Peten, Guatemala; Bahama Is. s.-ward from San Salvador and Rum and Long Cays to Grand Inagua and the Caicos Is; unknown from Cuba.—Fl. on the mainland (VI-)VII-XII; on the islands VI-XII(- l).—Boxcatzim, saccatzim, catzim (Yucatan Pen.); white logwood brush (Belize); haulback, holdback (Bahama Is.).
When Rudd established the synonymy of insular M. bahamensis and continental M. hemiendyta she plausibly suggested that the species was aboriginally native to Mexico and only introduced (though obviously long established) on the Bahamas, its absence from Cuba being otherwise inexplicable.
While I agree that the species, so strongly characterized by rufous indumentum and remarkable crested fmit, is not taxonomically divisible, the populations in the two main areas of dispersal are not identical.
The material studied in detail was sorted without difficulty into two series, as follows: a. Lfts of distal pair of pinnae (3-)4-6-jug., nearly always glabrous facially; stipe of pod 0-3 mm; Bahama Is. a. Lfts of distal pair of pinnae 6-9-jug., commonly but not invariably pubemlent facially; stipe of pod 3-9 mm; Yucatan Pen.
If the Bahaman populations are indeed secondary, they are at least beginning to undergo evolutionary selection, and a case could be made for segregation at some infraspecific rank.
The epithet hemiendyta (half-clothed) refers to the often bicolored indumentum of stems and leaf-stalks, which are mfous on the shady side and early blanched where exposed to sun.
B(xii).
Series FARINOSAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Farinosae Bameby, ser. nov., hucusque cum Acanthocarpis sensu latissimo associatae, verosimiliter ser. Andinis proximae sed ab iis foliis depauperatis, pinnis saepissime 1-, raro 3-jugis, ffosculis tetrameris, et legumine craspediiformi, ulterius distributione in temperatis calidis Argentinae territoriommque vicinorum (nec andina) diversae; a ser. Borealibus vix nisi leguminis valvulis plano-compressis (nec supra semina buUatis) abstant.—Sp. typica: M. farinosa Grisebach.
Microphyllous, stiflfly branched, drought-deciduous xeromorphic small trees and shrubs, armed at or near some or all nodes with infrastipular aculei, the cauline growth commonly alternating between barren long-shoots and fertile brachyblasts.
Indumentum of short plain hairs and either livid granules or minute viscid setulae.
Stipules lanceolate or setiform ±0.5-3 mm, often deciduous.
Leaf-formula i-iii/4-12, the Ifrachis spiculate or not, the larger lfts 1.5-8(-9) mm.
Inflorescence of globose capitula arising mostly from brachyblasts but sometimes axillary to a coeval If;flowers4-merous 8-androus; calyx 0.3-1.8 mm, distinctly toothed; corolla 2-3.8 mm, the lobes 1 -nerved; filaments white, either free or shortly monadelphous around stipe of ovary.
Pod a stipitate craspedium, the replum 0.3-0.6 mm diam., the planocompressed body 4-16 mm wide, the articles free-falling indehiscent; ovules 4-8.
Spp. four, of warm temperate Argentina, adj. Umguay, and in Gran Chaco extending n. into Paraguay and s.-e. Bolivia.
The one species of ser. Farinosae known to Bentham, M. detinens, was placed by him (1875: 426) in a heterogeneous ser. Acanthocarpae, associated with North American M. borealis and M. emoryana, and with the wholly dissimilar M. acantholoba, the common characters being scattered aculei and usually prickly replum.
Burkart (1948: 37) grouped M. detinens with M. farinosa and M. ostenii in a manifestly natural group, but retained all in an indefinitely characterized Acanthocarpae.
I interpret the series as tetramerous derivatives of pentamerous Andinae (or of common pentamerous antecedents) adapted to warm temperate and subtropical, seasonally dry climatic conditions of the Chaco and ecologically related regions.
The morphologically similar Boreales that occur at similar latitudes in North America may have arisen independently from similar ancestry, but most of them have retained a pentamerous ffower and all have acquired a rather different fmit, either bullate when craspedial, or inarticulate when ffat.
The Farinosae fall into two groups, one characterized by partly viscid-setulose indumentum and relatively narrow pod, the other by eglandular (but minutely granular) indumentum and broad pod.
Each consists of one widespread and common species and a rare vicariant relative.
Conspectus of ser. Farinosae Mimosa * Some capitate secretory setulae; pod less than 1 cm wide.
114. farinosa Grisebach 115. castanoclada Bameby & Fortunato ** No secretory setulae; pod over 1 cm wide.
116. detinens Bentham 117. ostenii Burkart Key to the species of ser. Farinosae 1.
Indumentum partly of capitate secretory setulae; calyx 0.3-0.7 mm, the teeth erect; pod in profile linear 4-9.5 mm wide; pre-Andean foothills of Argentina n.-ward from Cordoba, extending just into Bolivia and Paraguay.
2.
Pinnae of aU lvs exactly 1-jug.; range as given above 114.
M. farinosa (p. 191).
2.
Pinnae 2-3-jug.; local in s.-e. Bolivia and w. Paraguay only 115.
M. castanoclada (p. 192).
1.
Indumentum eglandular (some thickened granular trichomes, but these not secretory); calyx 1-1.5 mm, the teeth incurved; pod in profile oblong 12-16 mm wide; range similar to the last, but extending e. in Argentina to Entre Rios and adj. Uruguay.
3.
Stems and lvs pallidly glaucescent; rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-12 mm and the lfts commonly 4-6-, rarely 8-jug.; branches almost straight and the intemodes less than 1 cm long; widespread through n.-centr. Argentina n.-ward from w. Cordoba into w. Paraguay and s.-e. Bolivia 116.
M detinens (p. 193).
3.
Stems and lvs green; rachis of longer pinnae 12-25 mm and the lfts 7-12-jug.; branches flexuous and most intemodes 1-3 cm long; localized in prov. Entre Rios, Argentina and in adj. Uruguay.
117.
M. ostenii (p. 194).
114.
Mimosa farinosa Grisebach, PL lorentz.
86 [Abh. konigl.
Ges.
Wiss.
Gottingen 19: 134].
1^1A.—""[Lorentz] 265 .
.
.
Catamarca, frequens in sepibus et fruticetis pr. Fuerte de Andagala."
—Holotypus, presumably at GOET, not seen; Lorentz 343 and 645 at CORD, SI, are cited by Burkart, 1948: 76, as dupUcate cotypi; Lorentz 468, +B = F Neg. 1412, weU represents the species but is not a typus; Lorentz s.n.,
misit Grisebach IX. 1877 (K!) is at least authentic.
M. farinosa sensu Burkart, 1948: 73, fig. 9F, lam. VI (antecedent literature).
Stiflfly branched deciduous microphyllous shrubs and treelets attaining 3 m with tmnks to ± 1 dm diam., pungently armed near some or all nodes with (1 or) a pair of immediately infrastipular, straight ascending aculei 1-3 mm, the annotinous branches purplish-brown glabrate, the homotinous ones with lvs and peduncles minutely pilosulous and charged with livid (rarely pallid) globose, sessile or substipitate glands 0.1- 0.3 mm diam., the foliage green subconcolorous, the lfts pubemlent on both faces or only beneath and charged beneath, either around margin or overall, with sessile glands, the globose capitula solitary or to 4 together from brachyblasts, either accompanied or not by coeval lvs.
Stipules erect subulate 0.3-1 mm puberulent, deciduous.
Leafstalks mcludm% slender xtuWirnxs (1.5-)2-6 X 0.3- 0.5 mm, the open ventral groove not terminating in a spicule;/7z>2«(2^ 1-jug., the rachis 5-13(-16.5) mm, the longer interfoUolar segments 0.7-1.7 mm; lfts (5-)6-ll(-12)-jug., scarcely graduated, the first pair 0.3-1 mm distant from declined subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.5 mm, the blades oblong or elliptic-obovate from bluntly auriculate base, obtuse or deltately subacute at apex, the larger ones (2.2-)2.5-4.5 x 0.8-1.7 mm, 2.3- 4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, weakly (2-)3-nerved dorsally, the simple midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the inner posterior nerve produced well beyond mid-blade, the outer ones much shorter or obsolescent.
Peduncles subcapillary 4-21 mm; capitula without filaments 4.5-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds pubemlent and minutely glandular; bracts linear-oblanceolate or -spatulate 0.7- 1.2 X 0.2-0.4 mm, dorsally pubemlent, caducous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, all bisexual, the lowest in a capitulum sometimes smaller than the rest; calyx submembranous often brownish 0.5-0.7 mm, the erect triangular teeth ±0.2 mm, pubemlent and often minutely granular; corolla greenish-white pubemlent and livid-granular 2.3- 3.2 mm, the ovate, almost plane or at tip shallowly hooded lobes 0.8-1.3 x 0.7-0.9 mm; filaments white, united below ovary into a stemonozone 0.2-0.4 mm, exserted 3.3-4.6 mm.
Pods commonly 1-3 per capitulum stipitate, the stipe (0.5-) 1.5—4 mm, the linear, straight or gently curved, piano-compressed body 22-50(-55) x (4_)4.5_7.5 mm, (3-)4-7(-8)-seeded, the shallowly undulate-constricted replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, the papery, brown or nigrescent, pubemlent and granular, finely venulose valves lowcolliculate over each seed, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into free-falling indehiscent articles 4-7 mm long; seeds lentiform ±3.5-4 X 2.5-3 mm, the fuscous-olivaceous testa smooth.
On dry hillsides and in barrancas below 1500 m along the foothills of the Andes and the preAndean ranges of Argentina n.-ward from ±32°S in Cordoba to Jujuy, mostly extratropical, but collected once in spiny chaparral at 1240 m in valley of rio Mizque in prov. Florida of depto. Sta. Cmz, Bolivia, to be expected in intervening Chuquisaca and Tarija.—Fl.
IX-V, sometimes from defoliate branchlets. — C/«^w/ (and variants); churqui; teatin; tusca blanca.
The Cinqui is superficially similar to M. detinens in small leaves consisting of a single pair of pinnae, but differs consistently in straight ascending, immediately infrastipular aculei, erect calyx-teeth, and much narrower, puberulent and granular, not smooth and glabrous pod.
While M. detinens is characteristic of the Chaco thomforest, the habitat of M. farinosa is along the Andean piedmont.
The two species are not known to overlap in range, but in Argentina are closely vicariant.
115.
Mimosa castanoclada Bameby & Fortunato, Brittonia 39: 167, fig. 2.
1987.-"Paraguay.
Depto.
Chaco: En bosque abierto de quebrachos y samuhu, suelo arenoso, Mayor Pedro Lagerenza (60°45'W), 6 Apr 1978 (fl, fr Jun), A. Schinini (with E. Bordas) 74995."-Holotypus, CTES; clastotypus, NY!—Paratypus (e Bolivia), *S. G. Beck 9760, NY! Stifl[iy branched xeromorphic microphyllous drought-deciduous shrubs 1.2-3 m with stout purplish-castaneous, sparsely pallid-lenticellate branchlets armed at or close below random nodes with infrastipular, straight or subrecurved vulnerant aculei 1.5-5 mm and viscidulous throughout with scattered minute capiteUate setulae ±0.1 mm tall, the small lvs and solitary peduncles arising from brachyblasts thatched with imbricate stipules, the olivaceous concolorous thintextured lfts either glabrous or puberulent facially, minutely ciliolate or glandular-fimbriolate.
Stipules erect firm, accrescent upward along brachyblasts, deltate to lanceolate 0.7-3 x 0.4- 0.8 mm, the larger 3-nerved dorsally, all persistent.
Leaf-stalks 4-10 mm, the petiole 1.5-4 x 0.2 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 1-3 mm, the ventral groove subobsolete, spicules 0; pinnae 2-3-jug., the rachis 2.5-5 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.2-0.5 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 7-9-jug., the first pair 0.3-0.5 mm distant from reflexed subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.4 mm, the blades elliptic obtuse from auriculate base, the longer ones 1.2-1.7 x 0.4-0.5 mm, ±3 times as long as wide, very faintly 2-nerved dorsally.
Peduncles 5-13 mm; capitula globose, without filaments 6-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds densely pubemlent at apex; bracts lance-elliptic 1-1.3 x 0.3-0.4 mm, brown-tipped, pubemlent dorsally, gland-ciliolate, deciduous; y/ow^r^ 4-merous 8-androus, all bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.3-0.6 mm, externally pubemlent, the unequal subulate teeth 0.1- 0.2 mm; corolla tmmpet-shaped 2-2.8 mm, obtusely 4-angulate, the broadly ovate acute, almost plane, faintly 1-nerved lobes 0.6-0.9 x 0.5- 0.9 mm; filaments pale pink or (? fading) white, very shortly coherent around stipe of ovary, exserted 3-5 mm; ovary short-stipitate, either pubemlent or glabrous; style longer than stamens.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) stipitate, the oblong body ±25-32 x 7-9.5 mm, abmptly contracted at base into stipe ±7 mm, apiculate distally, the replum 0.2-0.3 mm diam., the papery purplishbrown valves both pubemlent and minutely sparsely glandular overall, 4-seeded, the articles presumably free-falling when ripe, ±5-10 mm long. In monte or drought-deciduous thom-scrub near 250-450 m, apparently vicariant with M. farinosa around the n. edge of its range of dispersal in Gran Chaco of n.-w. Paraguay (depto. Chaco) and in the Andean foothills along upper rio Pilcomayo in depto. Tarija, Bolivia, in lat. 20°40'-21°S, ± 6 r - 6 3 ° W . - n s . + new lvs IV, VIII, XI, the full cycle unknown.
Mimosa castanoclada has the stiffly fmticose habit, armed branchlets, condensed brachyblasts and tetramerous flowers that characterize M. farinosa and M. detinens of the selva chaqueiia in the same latitude and southward, but differs from both in smooth purplish-castaneous branchlets and 2-3-jugate, not precisely conjugate pinnae.
The minute foliage, which expands with or immediately after the capitula, recalls in size and leaf-formula that of Andean M. montana; but this is eglandular, has infrapetiolar (not infrastipular) aculei, a spicule between pinna-pairs, and pentamerous (not tetramerous) flowers.
116.
Mimosa detinens Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 89.
1846.-"Cordova and St. lago [=Santiago del Estero, Argentina] .
.
.
Tweedie, n. 1251."-Holotypus,K(hb. Hook.)! = Burkart, 1948, lam. V. M. lorentzii Grisebach, PI. lorentz.
86 [=Abh.
Konigl.
Ges.
Wiss.
Gottingen 19: 134].
1^1A.-''[Lorentz] 266 .
.
.
Santiago de Estero."
—Holotypus, coUected XII. 1871, presumably at GOET (not seen); isotypi cited by Burkart, 1948: 80, at CORD, SI.-Equated withM detinensby Burkart, 1948: 77 (+ antecedent literature).
M. detinens sensu Bentham, 1875: 426 (replo aculeate neglecto); Burkart, 1948, I.e. + fig. 8D; Arenas, Etnobotanica Lengua-Maskoy 193, fig. 29B. 1981.
Microphyllous arborescent shrubs 1-5 m, randomly armed close to or close below some or all nodes with stout recurved, stramineous or brownish aculei ±2-6 mm, the small droughtdeciduous lvs either solitary or few together on pemle-like brachyblasts, the young stems, lf-stks and peduncles minutely pubemlent and lividor orange-granular, the smooth plane thick-textured, pallidly concolorous lfts glabrous or almost so, dull gray or glaucescent in age, the globose capitula arising, either with or before the lvs, singly and paired (sometimes with a branchlet) either from primary If-axils or from brachyblasts, on peduncle longer than associated If.
Stipules erect setiform 0.5-1.5 mm, caducous.
Leaf-stalks 1.5-10.5 x 0.3-0.4 mm, openly grooved ventrally, at apex with a stramineous spicule 0.2-0.6 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 3.5- 12 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.8- 2. l(-2.5) mm; lfts (3-)4-6(-8)-jug., the often smaU first pair 0.3-1.1 mm distant from erect subulate paraphyllidia 0.15-0.3 mm, the blades linearoblong or narrowly oblong-obovate from obtusangulate or merely asymmetrical base, obtuse at apex, the penultimate pair 3-6.5(-8) x 1.3-1.8 (-2.2) mm, 2.3-4.1 times as long as wide, all veinless above or on both faces, the immersed subcentric midrib sometimes faintly discolored beneath.
Peduncles (3-)7-22 mm; capitula without filaments 4.5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the densely packed obtuse fl-buds pubemlent at tip; bracts linear-spatulate 0.7-1 x 0.25-0.4 mm, pubemlent or tomenteUous at apex; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, all bisexual; calyx campanulate, bluntly 4-angulate 1-1.5 mm, the deltate obtuse lobes a little thickened at the incurved apex; corollas narrowly vase-shaped 2.2- 3.2 mm, the ovate concave, apically hooded and slightly thickened lobes 0.7-1.3 x 0.5-0.9 mm; filaments white, either free or shortly monadelphous around stipe of glabrous ovary, exserted 3-3.5 mm.
Pods commonly 1-4 per capitulum, stipitate, glabrous overall, the stipe 4-10 mm, the piano-compressed body when fully fertile oblong 3-6 X 1.2-1.6 cm but often sterile proximaUy and then variably distorted, the shallowly undulate unarmed replum 0.3-0.5 mm wide, the papery valves at first pale green becoming paUidglaucescent or -stramineous, umbonate over each developed seed, in dehiscence breaking up into (3-)4-6 free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 6-11 mm long; seeds transverse at middle of pod, compressed-lenticular ±5-6 x 2.5-3.5 mm, the fuscous-brown testa sublustrous.
Widespread throughout the thom-scrub and savanna woodlands of Gran Chaco in n.-centr. Argentina, from Formosa and Chaco through Santiago del Estero to adj. Tucuman, Catamarca and Cordoba, thence n. into n.-w. Paraguay (Boqueron, Presidente Hayes, N. Asuncion) and, by way of the Pilcomayo valley into extreme s. Bolivia (e. Tarija).—Fl.
VIII-III, the fmits both coeval with fls and long hysteranthous. — Garapato, cinqui (better reserved for M. farinosa).
111.
Mimosa ostenii Spegazzini ex Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 81, fig. 80.
1948.-"Argentina.
Prov. de Entre Rios: Gualeguaychu, en el monte xerofilo del Parque Unzue, A. Burkart 1413, 6.
L1932."-Holotypus, SI (not seen); isoparatypus, A. L. Cabrera, NY! M. os'^^/t//sensu Burkart, 1987: 492,fig.218 (pulchra!).
Arborescent shrubs 2-5 m armed on random intemodes of stifl[iy flexuous, terete but obtusely ribbed branches with a solitary, gently recurved infrastipular aculeus 2-6 mm, appearing glabrous but the young growth and inflorescence minutely pubemlent and reddish-granular, the lvs dark green subconcolorous glabrous, the globose capitula either solitary or 2-3 together, either in axil of coeval lvs or on short lateral branchlets, almost never on scaly brachyblasts.
Stipules appressed to stem, narrowly subulate 0.5- 1 mm, either deciduous or persistent.
Leaf-stalks including pulvinus l-9(-l 1) mm, rounded dorsally, openly sulcate ventrally, the sulcus bridged and vestigially spiculate at apex; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 12-25 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.2-2.5 mm; lfts 7-11(- 12)-jug., scarcely graduated, the first pair 0.8-2 mm distant from minute papilliform paraphyllidia, the blades narrowly oblong obtuse, the largest 5-8(-9) X 1.5-3 mm, 3-4.2 times as long as wide, all nerveless ventrally, faintly l(-2)-nerved dorsally, the almost immersed midrib subcentric beyond mid-blade, the posterior nerve obscure or very short.
Peduncles 5-18 mm; capitula without filaments 6-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-spatulate or -oblanceolate ±1 mm, deciduous; pedicels 0-0.2 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx membranous turbinate-campanulate 1-1.8 mm, the tube of thinner texture below the sinuses than below the lobes, these obovate or obtusely triangular 0.2- 0.3 mm, dorsally convex and pubemlent; corolla whitish, narrowly vase-shaped 3.3-3.8 mm, the ovate acute 1-nerved lobes 1.1-1.3 mm; filaments white, shortly monadelphous around stipe of ovary, exserted 3-3.5 mm.
Pods essentially as those of M. detinens but the body (ace.
Burkart) attaining 8 cm in length and the seeds to 7.
In campo thickets along streams and rivers, localized at low elevations along rios Gualeguay, Gualeguaychu and Umguay in lat. ±31°40'- 33°20'S, in prov. Entre Rios, Argentina, and adj. U m g u a y . - n .
XI-I. A close affinity between M. ostenii and M. detinens was demonstrated in Burkart's revision, to which I can add nothing of substance.
The flexuous stems, greener and on the average coarser foliage and the somewhat larger capitula (without filaments 6-8, not 4.5-6 mm diam.), combined with a distinctive disjunct area of dispersal make identification of M. ostenii an easy matter.
B(xiii).
Series EPHEDROIDEAE Bentham Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Ephedroideae Bentham.
M. sect. Ameria ser. Ephedroideae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 412.
1842.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Ephedroideae Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 429.
1875.-Sp. lectotypica (unica): M. ephedroides (Hooker & Amott) Bentham.
Unarmed shrubs with prominently striate branches, leafless or in spring remotely and transiently foliate.
Pubescence scanty, simply puberulous eglandular.
Leaf-formula i/3-4.
Stipules linear-subulate, persistent.
Flowers capitellate, basically 4-merous (casually 5-merous) diplostemonous.
Filaments briefly monadelphous below ovary.
Fruit a stipitate, planocompressed craspedium with papery valves and slender unarmed replum.
Sp. one, of n.-centr. Argentina.
The series Ephedroideae was based by Bentham on two species, M. ephedroides and M. gilliesii, the latter shown by Burkart (Physis 55: 53.
1945) to be Prosopis globosa Gillies.
While the series was first referred to sect. Ameria, a group characterized by valves of the pod falling entire from the replum, the fmit of M. ephedroides is in reality a conventional craspedium.
The pod of Prosopis answers better to the definition of sect. Ameria, and the case might be argued that M. gilliesii would on this ground be the preferable choice of lectotype.
This, however, would contrive to split between two genera the epithet common to the series and its one remaining member.
Burkart has pointed to M. farinosa and M. detinens as closest akin to the xeromorphically much modified M. ephedroides.
This seems highly probable from both morphological and geographic viewpoints, for fugacious conjugate-pinnate leaves, the individual flowers and the pods are essentially of the same type in all three species.
Nevertheless the equisetum-likQ stems lacking secondary short-shoots, and a complete absence of either aculei or gland-tipped trichomes form a strong differential syndrome.
118.
Mimosa ephedroides (Hooker & Amott) Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 413.
1842.
Prosopis ephedroides Gillies ex Hooker & Amott, Bot. Misc.
3: 204.
1833.-"[Argentina.] Province of San Luis [but according to label of holotypus Prov. S. Juan], Dr. Gillies."
—Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)! = Burkart, 1948, lam. 5 (right); isotypus, E! M. ephedroides sensu Bentham, 1875: 429; Burkart, 1948: 115 (antecedent bibliography), fig. 16; Legum. Argent.,
2''^ ed., fig. 17 (right).
1952.
Densely stiffly branched, leafless or sparsely transiently leafy xeromorphic shrubs attaining ±2 m, unarmed eglandular, with many narrowly ascending cylindric, striately ± 16-ribbed branches abmptly acute and pungent at tip, appearing glabrous but thinly pubemlent near nodes and on peduncles, the hairs deciduous, the globose capitula solitary from nodes of new branchlets.
Stipules linear-subulate brown-tipped 1-3.5 mm, prominently 1 -nerved, persistent.
Leaves mostly reduced to a subulate point resembling accompanying stipules, when developed conjugate-pinnate, the slender If-stk to 7 mm and rachis of pinnae ± as long; lfts 3-4-jugate, oblong-eUiptic obtuse ±2-3.5 mm, weakly 1-nerved.
Peduncles ±5-15 mm; capitula prior to anthesis moriform, without filaments 6.5-8 mm diam., the obtuse fl-buds either glabrous or minutely pubemlent at tip; bracts linear-oblance-attenuate ±1.5-2.5 mm, tardily deciduous; pedicels to 0.3 mm; flowers 4(-5)-merous diplostemonous; calyx membranous campanulate, glabrous extemally or minutely ciliolate, unequally toothed, the tooth opposed to bracts usually longest and attaining 0.2-0.5 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.5- 3.4 mm, the ovate membranous lobes 1-nerved; filaments whitish, monadelphous through 0.4- 0.7 mm around stipe of glabrous or puberulent ovary, exserted 5-6 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, broadly Unear-oblong piano-compressed but low-colliculate over each developed seed, the body 45-95 x 9.5-14 mm, commonly subfalcate or twisted, contracted at base into a stipe 1-2 mm, shortly cuspidate at apex, glabrous overall, the papery, finely reticulate-venulose valves separating when ripe from the slender, shallowly constricted replum and breaking up into 5-8 freefalling, individually indehiscent articles as long as or a little longer than wide; seeds (ace.
Burkart, 1948, I.e.) basipetal castaneous 5-8 x 4.5-5 mm.
On desertic, sometimes saline, pre-Andean plains, dunes and arid foothills of n.-centr. Argentina, in provinces of Catamarca, La Rioja, S. Juan, n. Mendoza and S. Luis.—Fl.
X-XIL — Prendedor; pichana.
An eminently singular mimosa, simulating in its ephedroid habit of growth the sympatric Prosopis sericantha Gill, ex H. & A. and some sennas of ser. Aphyllae native to the same general region.
B(xiv).
Series ECHINOCAULAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Echinocaulae Barneby, ser. nova monotypica hucusque in ser. Rubicaulibus submersa, ab hac caulibus herbaceis virgatis inermibus, pube caulina e setis patulis constanti hispida, necnon paraphyllidiis camosulis diversa, verosimiliter ser. Paucifoliatis propius affinis, sed inter eas habitu, statura elata, foliolis majusculis, pube setosa, paraphyllidiis et legumine polyspermo singularis.—Sp. unica: M. echinocaula Bentham.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Rubicaules sensu Bentham, 1875: 421, minima ex parte (sp. 179 sola).
Stems functionally herbaceous virgate unarmed.
Indumentum of villi and coarse setae, eglandular.
Stipules 1-nerved.
Leaf-formula iiv/10-15, the larger lfts 10-18 mm.
Inflorescence a terminal pseudoraceme of globose capitula; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the coroUa-lobes 1-nerved.
Filaments pink, shortly monadelphous.
Pods linear 5-6.5 mm wide, 13-18-seeded.
Sp. one, of upland planaltine Brazil.
Mimosa echinocaula, placed by Bentham in a group of unarmed American Rubicaules next to M. pistaciifolia Willdenow (which is not a Mimosa) and the very unlike Mexican M. leucaenoides, is morphologically isolated.
Its leaf-formula, spiculate leaf-rachis and venation of leaflets are reminiscent of M. (Bimucronatae) paraibana, but its functionally herbaceous, unarmed, hispidly setose stems, and its subfoliaceous, at tip often subglandular (perhaps sometimes ant-nibbled) paraphyllidia have no close counterpart among the aerially woody and mostly arborescent and thorny, tetramerous Bimucronatae of Brazil.
The relatively large paraphyllidia and corolla-tube pallid and scarious below the sinuses between lobes recalls M. paraguariae, but the general facies and indumentum are incompatible with ser. Stipellares.
It appears to me nearest to sympatric members of ser. Paucifoliatae, in which one taxon (M. maracayuensis) has acquired similar setose indumentum and another (M. diplotricha var. odibilis) a polyspermous fmit.
But from these M. echinocaula is notably distinct in virgate habit and relatively ample leaflets.
119.
Mimosa echinocaula Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 421.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 365, t. 92, char, ampliat.
1876.— "Habitat in provincia Goyaz ad Meiaponte [=Piren6polis]: Pohl... in provincia Bahiensi: Luschnath.
.
. ."—Lectotypus, Pohl 914 (lvs), 2813 (fls), W!; isotypus, Pohl s.n.,
M!; syntypus, Luschnath s.n.,
labelled "Macahe [Sa. dos Orgaos, Rio de Janeiro], 8.
X.1833."
, M (hb. Mart.
101, adnot.
Benth.,
" M! Stout virgate, amply leafy subshrubs with erect simple or arcuately few-branched, prominently obtusely ribbed stems 1.5-2 m, below inflorescence 4-6 mm diam. and (almost always) hispid with erect brown glabrous, sometimes basally dilated, stiflf but not vulnerant setae to 5-6.5 mm and commonly in addition villosulous like Ifand inflorescence-axes with fine whitish or lutescent vilU less than 0.5 mm, the (dry) lfts brownolivaceous, dorsally paler, commonly glabrous but sometimes villosulous like stem, the inflorescence a basally foliate pseudoraceme of many globose capitula ultimately exserted 1-4.5 dm above foliage.
Stipules lance-attenuate (5-)7-18 mm, the dorsally 1-nerved blade loosely involute.
Leaf-stalks 4.5-11 cm, sometimes remotely setose dorsally, the petiole 2-4 cm, at middle 0.7-1.4 mm diam., the longer (or only) interpinnal segments 13-20(-25) mm; between each pinna-pair a subulate spicule 0.5-1.5(-2) mm; pinnae 2-5-, in some larger lvs at least 3-jug., subaccrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 4-8(-9.5) cm, beyond first pair of lfts ridged ventrally, the longer interfoliolar segments 2.5-8(- 10) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (10-)11-15-jug., decrescent proximally, the first pair 1-3.5 mm distant from elliptic subcamosulous paraphyUidia, in outline oblong-eUiptic or -obovate obtuse and sometimes mucronulate, the larger ones 10- 18 X 2.5-6.5 mm, mostly finely 3-nerved from pulvinule, the centric midrib giving rise to 3-4 pairs of weak camptodrome secondaries.
Peduncles solitary in distal If-axils and thence mostly 2-3-nate, 14-34 mm; capitula without filaments 6-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis hispid with emergent bract-tips; bracts linear-oblanceolate 2.5-4 X 0.15-0.2 mm, hispidulous distally;y7c>H'- ers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate and slightly smaller, the upper bisexual; calyx a membranous, irregularly or obscurely denticulate, minutely setulose-ciliolate cup 0.2- 0.45 mm; corolla turbinate-funnelform, that of lower fls 2.2-2.7 mm, of distal fls 2.6-3.1 mm, the glabrous tube pallid and scarious below the sinuses between lobes, these ovate 1-1.2 mm, almost plane, 1-nerved, extemally hispidulous; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.5-1 mm around base of glabrous ovary, exserted 3-6.5 mm.
Pods ±1-5 per receptacle, ascending subsessile or basally attenuate into a stipe to 3 mm, in profile linear 60-90 x 5-6.5 mm, 13-18-seeded, the straight or obscvu^ely undulate replum 0.4- 0.5 mm wide, the papery, when ripe brownish valves low-convex over each seed, either glabrous or thinly minutely villosulous and granular overall, finally breaking up into square or transversely oblong, individually indehiscent articles 4-5 mm long; seeds in profile 2.7-3.3 x 1.6-2.5 mm, the testa dull brown or pinkish-brown.
In cerrado and campo rupestre, on sandstone or quartzite, 850-1400 m, known only from Sa.
Geral do Parana and Sa. dos Pireneus in s.-centr. Goias (lat. ± 15°30'-16°S), Brazil.-Fl.
I-V. While M. echinocaula was first seen in a form with stems setose but otherwise glabrous, aU modem collections from Sa. dos Pireneus have glabrous leaflets but vUlosulous stems and leafstalks, and one of them has stems alternatively densely hispid and esetose on diflferent plants.
One collection from north of Formosa has the long setae of the type but both stems and leaves are gray-viUosulous.
The variation in the two elements of indumentum appears capricious and taxonomically inconsequential.
Bentham's report of M. echinocaula from Bahia is based on errors of labelling and interpretation.
Luschnath's specimen (BR, hb. Mart.
!), which was annotated by Bentham, is labelled Macahe and dated to 1833, a year spent by Luschnath (according to Urban, 1906) within the state and city of Rio de Janeiro.
Macahe is presumably either the river or the serra of that name (now Macae) that drains or forms part of Sa. dos Orgaos.
The plant is certainly M. echinocaula, but is in all probability mismatched with the ticket, as happened all too often in the Martius herbarium.
No other known specimen of M. echinocaula is attributed to Luschnath, and the species has been found in modem times only on the crest of the Planalto in Goias, in climax cerrado or campo mpestre, an environment markedly diflferent from the heights of the Organ Mountains.
If not rejected out of hand, the report of M. echinocaula based on Luschnath's specimen must be received with skepticism until proved correct.
B(xv).
Series PAUCIFOLIATAE Bentham Mimosa sect. Batocaulon DeCandolle ser. Paucifoliatae Bentham.
M. sect. Ameria ser. Paucifoliatae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 412.
1842.—Sp. lectotypica: M. paucifolia Bentham.—M. sect. Habbasia ser. Leptopoda [sic] Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 431.
1875, nom. illeg., including typus of anterior ser. Paucifoliatae.
M. ser. Asperatae ""Schrankioideae"" Bentham, 1875: 436, ex parte (exclus. no. 257).
M. ser. Leptopodae sensu Bentham, 1876: 368-sequ.,
ex parte [spp. 156, 159, 160, 162, 163].
M. ser. Asperatae sensu Bentham, 1876: 378-sequ.,
ex parte [spp. 176, 177].
Herbs and weakly fmtescent subshrubs, microphyllidious or sometimes almost leafless, either unarmed or armed with scattered or serial cat's-claw aculei.
Pubescence potentially composed of minute incurved hairs, erect plain hairs less than 1 mm, and livid granules, exceptionally (M. maracayuensis) of slender tapering setae to 2-3.5 mm, but often wanting or almost so, never glandular (exceptionally a gland-tipped setule on calyx-teeth).
Stipules lanceolate, subulate or setiform, mostly 1-nerved.
Leaf-formula i-x(-xiv)/ (1-)2-31, the pinnae when few and short sometimes caducous and some or all lf-stks then phyllodial; interpinnal spicules commonly present, in few species deltate, suppressed in spp. with greatly reduced lvs and randomly in some lvs or some plants of the rest.
Capitula globose, without filaments 3-7 mm diam.; flowers sessile, 4-merous 8-androus (with random individual exceptions), the lower ones mostly staminate but occasionally all bisexual; calyx membranous (0.15-)0.2-0.7 mm, the orifice either tmncate or shortly denticulate; bisexual corollas (1.2-) 1.4-3.2(-3.5) mm, the lobes 1-nerved; filaments commonly monadelphous through 0.1-0.6(-0.7) mm, occasionally essentially free to base.
Pods either sessile or stipitate, in profile linear (2.5-)3-7 mm wide, the replum (0.2-)0.3-0.7 mm diam., either smooth or aculeate, the valves disarticulating.
Spp. 17, all but one present on or endemic to upland e. Brazil and Paraguay, most prevalent and most diverse in campo cerrado and campo mpestre habitats, few extending into n.-e. Argentina and extratropical Brazil, one widespread n.-ward through Amazonia and Central America to tropical Mexico, the Greater Antilles, and adventive (cultivated) in the paleotropics, one known only from Belize.
As defined herein ser. Paucifoliatae comprises three circles of afl&nity: one with aculeate stems and normally bipinnate foliage, exemplified by widespread weedy M. diplotricha; one with unarmed (or very weakly erratically armed), in one species (M. maracayuensis) hispidly setose, stems and with foliage as before, in which M. gracilis sensu lato occupies a central and dominant position; and one unarmed but with leaves variously reduced in formula or eventually phyllodial.
Pivotal to the whole series is the M. gracilis complex, for its var. invisiformis links it directly to M. diplotricha, and its var. brevissima directly to M. piptoptera of the phyllodial subgroup.
The Paucifoliatae appear derived from primitive Rubicaules by modification oflife-form from lowland tropical prickly climbers to relatively xeromorphic herbs or weak subshmbs, this accompanied by reduction in flower-size and width tural ancestor of the present series in sect. Baof pod and by adjustment to campo and savanna tocaulon.
The fourth species known in 1841 was habitats, in part extratropical.
The series diflfers described as a Schrankia, under a misapprehenfromser.
Setosae and ser. Glandulosae in smaller sion about the pod's mature structure.
In his capitula and lack of gland-tipped setulae, and mono^a^ih of 1^15 and Flora brasiliensis (1^16) from the intimately related ser. Filipedes in teBentham divided the six of sixteen species known tramerous (not trimerous) flowers. at that time between two series of sect. Habbasia, In 1841 Bentham was acquainted with only referring armed Mm. z>zv/5(2 (herein called M. (af/pfour of the present Paucifoliatae, and imperfectly lotricha) and selloi to ser. Asperatae, the remainwith all of these.
Mistakenly assuming that the der to a newly and loosely defined ser. Leptopods would prove to dehisce valvately, he repodae that included also the Filipedes and ferred three of them to the afterward discredited Cordistipulae of this work.
The name Leptoposect.
Ameria, M. gracilis to its ser. Pedunculosae dae, however its contents were defined, is ille- (an illegitimate name) and Mm. paucifolia and gitimate, because Bentham included within it the phyllodinea to its ser. Paucifoliatae, nomenclaprior ser. Paucifoliatae of sect. Ameria.
Conspectus of ser. Paucifoliatae Mimosa * Araied; pinnae normally foliate.
120. diplotricha Wright ex Sauvalle a. var. diplotricha b. var. odibilis Bameby 121. supravisa Bameby 122.
5^//o/Bentham 123. suburbana Bamehy 124. pinetorum Standley ** Unarmed but setose-hispid; pinnae normally foliate.
125. maracayuensis Chodat & Hassler *** Unarmed, glabrous or simply pilosulous-puberulent (some vars. of M. gracilis sometimes weakly aculeate); pinnae normally foliate.
126. ^rad/w Bentham I. subsp. capillipes (Bentham) Bameby a. var. capillipes b. var. invisiformis Bameby II. subsp. gracilis a. var. gracilis b. var. brevissima Bameby III. subsp. filiformis (Bentham) Bameby a. var. filiformis b. var. stipitata Bameby c. var. longipes Bameby d. var. leiocarpa (Burkart) Bameby 127. burchellii Bentham 128. pratincola Bsimeby 129. gatesiae Bameby 130. diptera Bameby **** Unarmed, glabrous or nearly so; pinnae paucifoliolate or progressively phyllodial.
131. multiceps Bameby 132. piptoptera Bameby 133. paucifolia Bentham a. var. paucifolia b. var. scoparia Bameby 133bis. paucifoliae afhn.
134. phyllodinea Bentham a. var. phyllodinea b. var. phyllorrhoea Bameby 135. equisetum Bameby 136. flabellifolia Bameby Key to species of ser. Paucifoliatae 1.
Stems (and often also lf-stks and peduncles) armed with rows of recurved prickles.
2.
Pinnae exactly 1 pair in all lvs; Belize 124.
M. pinetorum (p. 207).
2.
Pinnae at least 2 pairs; widespread.
3.
Stems either 4-5-ribbed or subterete; pods either sessile or stipitate, but the stipe not over 2.5 mm.
4.
Lf-formula iv-ix/17-28; pinnae crowded along distal half of If-stk, inserted 3-8 mm apart; larger lfts 0.6-1.2 mm wide; pods numerous in dense clusters, sessile, and both replum and valves setaculeate; common and widespread from s. Mexico and Greater Antilles to Paraguay, n. Argentina, and s. Brazil; weedy and cultivated in paleotropics.
.
120.
M. diplotricha (p. 200).
4.
Lf-formula ii-iv/7-20; pinnae inserted 1-2 cm apart; larger lfts 3 mm wide (if lfts not over 1.5 mm and dorsally like stems finely pilosulous with erect straight hairs, see M. gracilis var. invisiformis, p. 211); replum of pod aculeate but valves not so.
5.
Ribs of stems continuously prominent; petiole of longer lvs 1.6—4 cm; longer pinnae 2-4 cm, their lfts 7-14-jug.; pod 3.7-4.2 mm wide, villosulous; Planaltine Brazil (s.-e. Para s. through Goias to w. S. Paulo and Mato Grosso do Sul) 121.
M. supravisa (p. 202).
5.
Ribs of stems scarcely raised, the intemodes only obscurely 5-angulate; petiole of longer lvs 3-6 cm; longer pinnae 3-6(-7) cm, their lfts 15-20-jug.; pod 6-7 mm wide; s.-e. Brazil, on the Atlantic slope (Rio de Janeiro to Sta. Catarina) 122.
M. selloi (p. 205).
3.
Stems sharply 3-gonous; pod contracted at base into stipe 4.5-6 mm; local in Distrito Federal, Brazil .... 123.
M. suburbana (p. 205).
1.
Stems unarmed.
6.
Lfts of longer (or only) pair of pinnae 6-23-jug. 7.
Lf-formula ii-x(-xiv)/6-l 2, the lfts seldom to 16(-l 8)-jug.; widespread over planaltine and warm temperate Brazil, n.-e. Argentina and Paraguay.
8.
Stems hispid with fine tapering setae to 2-3.5 mm; e. Paraguay and extratropical Brazil 125.
M. maracayuensis (p. 208).
8.
Stems either glabrous, or minutely puberulent, or finely pilosulous, but the longest hairs less than 1.5 mm.
9.
Lvs petiolate, the first pair of pinnae (5-)8-55(-70) mm distant from pulvinus.
10.
Corolla glabrous.
11.
Pinnae straight or almost so and the rachis of longer ones 13 mm or more; between each pinna-pair a setiform spicule (this rarely lacking in some or all lvs); widespread.
12.
Pod 30-45 X 4-5 mm, the articles about as long as wide; dispersed over planaltine and warm temperate Brazil, Paraguay, and n. Argentina; subsp. filiformis of: 126.
Af. gracilis (p. 209).
12.
Pod 70-80 X 6-6.5 mm, the articles 8-10 mm long; local in e.-centr. Goias. .. 127.
M burchellii (p. 217).
11.
Pinnae recurved from If-stk and the rachis of longer ones 3-7 mm; between each pair of pinnae a minute deltate-apiculate scale; local in highland e.-centr. Goias and Distrito Federal, BrazU 129.
M. gatesiae (p. 218).
10.
Corolla hispidulous; subsp. gracilis and subsp. capillipes of: .. 126.
M. gracilis (p. 209).
9.
Lvs sessile, the first pair of pinnae directly next to pulvinus; known only from wet meadowland (brejo) in Sa.
Geral do Parana, e.-centr. Goias 128.
M. pratincola (p. 218).
7.
Lf-formula i/12-23; local in s.-w. Goias, s. Mato Grosso, and Mato Grosso do Sul 130.
M. diptera (p. 219).
6.
Lfts of longer (or only) pair of pinnae 1-5-jug., the pinnae in some lvs caducous or wanting.
13.
Primary axis of lvs (lf-stks) normally developed, (1-)1.5-15 cm.
14.
Lvs essentially homomorphic, if any modified into phyllodes then all so.
15.
Lf-stks terete or obscurely compressed-obtusangulate 0.2-1.1 mm diam. 16.
Largest lfts 1.5-6.5 x 0.7-3.5 mm; capitula 3.5-5 mm diam.; s. Maranhao and w. Bahia to centr. and w. Minas Gerais and s. Goias.
17.
Stems and petioles relatively stiff"and coarse, the petioles 0.5-1.1 mm diam. 18.
Stems procumbent; lf-stks (1.5-)2-5(-6.5) cm, the petiole proper (0.8-)l- 4.5(-5) cm and 0.5-3 times as long as rachis; Distrito Federal and adj. Goias; var. brevissima of: 126.
M. gracilis (p. 209).
18.
Stems stiffly erect-ascending; lf-stks mostly 5-11 cm, the petiole proper (2.5-)4-9 cm and 3-6 times as long as rachis; s. Maranhao s. through transfranciscan Bahia to e.-centr. Goias, locally e. to centr. Bahia 132.
M. piptoptera (p. 220).
17.
Stems pliantly ephedroid or finely grasslike and petioles filiform 0.2-0.3 mm diam.; local in centr. and w. Minas Gerais and adj. S. Paulo.
19.
Stems 2-4.5 dm; rachis of pinnae 1.5-4 mm, the lfts 2(-3)-jug. and the longest of them 1-3 mm 133.
M paucifolia (p. 223).
19.
Stems 5-8 dm; rachis of pinnae 5-11 mm, the lfts 3-5-, mostly 4-jug., and the longest of them 3.5-6 mm; incompletely known sp. of n.-centr. Minas Gerais 133bis.
M. sp. (p. 224).
16.
Largest lfts 8-10 x 5-7 mm; capitula 6-7 mm diam.; s. Mato Grosso and adj. Mato Grosso do Sul 131.
M. multiceps (p. 220).
15.
Lf-stks strongly obcompressed, bifacial, at middle 0.8-2.5 mm wide and on each face coarsely 5-9-ribbed; s.-e. Goias and centr. Minas Gerais.
.
134.
M. phyllodinea (p. 224).
14.
Lvs dimorphic, the early ones conjugate-pinnate (lf-formula i/2-4) and subtending a peduncle, the distal ones crowded simple subfiliform (grasslike) and without accompanying peduncle; s.-e. Paraguay 135.
M equisetum (p. 225).
13.
Primary If-stk and rachis of the one pair of pinnae subobsolete, the 6 or 10 lfts of each If subflabellately crowded and appearing almost sessile against the stem; e.-centr. Goias 136.
M flabellifolia (p. 226).
120.
Mimosa diplotricha C. Wright ex Sauvalle, Anales Acad. Ci.
Med.
Habana 5: 405.
1868.- Typus infra sub var. diplotricha indicatur.
Herbs and subshrubs of rapid growth and early maturity, when young often appearing monocarpic but potentially soft-woody in age, the diffuse, ascending or (when crowded) leaning and scrambling, pith-filled stems (0.5-) 1-2.5 m, usually densely, sometimes remotely armed along the (4-)5 continuously prominulous stramineous ribs with sharp recurved, stramineous browntipped aculei to (1-)1.5-3(-3.5) mm and usually also ± villosulous with fine erect-spreading hairs to 0.3-1 (-1.3) mm, exceptionally glabrous, the dorsal rib of lf-stks and axes of inflorescence similarly prickly, the bicolored, dorsally pallid, thintextured lfts from villosulous on both faces to minutely ciliolate but facially glabrous, exceptionally glabrous overall, the short-pedunculate globose capitula at first axillary and much surpassed by the subtending If, some later ones becoming pseudoracemose.
Stipules narrowly lanceattenuate or setiform, sometimes a little dilated at base, 2-6(-7) x 0.25-0.6 mm, often reddish, 1-nerved dorsally, sometimes subtended by a pair of prickles, persistent.
Leafstalks of primary cauline lvs (4-)5-10.5(-12) cm, the petiole (1.5-)2.5-7 cm, commonly about as long as or longer than the rachis, this 2-5.5 cm, its longer interpinnal segments (3-)4-8(-10) mm, the ventral groove intermpted between pinna-pairs by an erect-ascending spicule; pinnae of middle lvs or of all lvs below inflorescence 4-8(-9)-jug., very sensitive and in most herbarium specimens deflected and folded back-to-back behind If-stk, the rachis of longer ones 1.5-3.5(-4) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.6(-2) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 17-28-jug., the first pair 0.3-2 mm distant from unequal paraphyllidia, the exterior member of these 0.6-1.6, rarely 2.5 mm, the Iftblades in outline linear-oblong or linear, subacute or apiculate, those near mid-rachis 2.5-6(- 7) X 0.6-1.2(-1.4) mm, 4-5.5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath faintly l(-2)- nerved from piUvinule, the subcentric midrib very slender, often merely discolored, the posterior nerve when present short or obscure.
Peduncles 1-3 per node, commonly geminate, 5-16(-20) mm; capitula without filaments 4-5.5(-6) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts ellipticoblanceolate 0.4-1 mm; flowers normally 4-, rarely and randomly 5-merous, diplostemonous, either all bisexual or a few lower ones staminate; calyx campanulate 0.2-0.4 mm, glabrous, the rim entire or obscurely denticulate; corolla narrowly turbinate or vase-shaped 1.7-2.4(-2.8) mm, the membranous ovate concave 1-nerved, reddish or sometimes green lobes 0.5-0.9(-1) x 0.4-0.65 mm, either glabrous or thinly hispidulous externally; filaments pink, very shortly or obscurely monadelphous around base of ovary, exserted (2-)3-5 mm.
Pods usually 10 or more per capitulum, crowded into a dense umbelUform cluster close against the stem, sessile, in profile oblong or linear, straight or gently decurved, usually (8-)10-24(-35) X 3-4.2(-5.5) mm and (2-)3-8- seeded but in Mexican var. odibilis 40-70 mm long and 12-16-seeded, the replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, densely (sparsely) aculeate along dorsal and lateral ribs with either erect or decurved prickles 0.4-1.3 mm, the papery valves usually villosulous and either overall or only over each seed ± densely setaculeate, sometimes simply setaculeate, when ripe breaking into free-falling, individually dehiscent, rhombic or almost square articles 3-3.5 mm long; seeds compressed, in broad profile rhombic or ovate 2.3-3 x 1.4-2 mm, the testa pale or rich brown, lustrous.
In the context of its immediate group, diagnostic characters of M. diplotricha are relatively long leaf-petioles coinciding with very short axillary peduncles, 4-8 pairs of pinnae crowded along an axis no longer, often shorter than the associated petiole, and the fertility of most flowers of each capitulum, the pods forming a dense umbellate cluster.
Varieties of M. quadrivalvis, similar in prickly stem and shortly pedunculate capitula, are easily mistaken for M. diplotricha before the characteristic fmits begin to take form; but the common South American element of this group, M. quadrivalvis var. leptocarpa, may be known even at anthesis by relatively few (2-4, not 4-9) pairs of pinnae in largest leaves, and the less widespread var. tetragona by petioles shorter (not longer) than leaf-rachis.
Rare forms of M. diplotricha with only few and scattered prickles resemble M. gracilis var. invisiformis, endemic to highland east-central Goias, but in this each capitulum bears only one or two fertile fmits.
Other close relatives are: M. supravisa, which has fewer broader leaflets and longer pods with simply villosulous (not setose) valves; M. selloi, with subterete rather than sharply pentagonal stems, only 2-4 pairs of pinnae per leaf, and stipitate pods; ,and M. suburbana, like the last but with trigonous stems.
In North America and the Antilles, where M. diplotricha may not be primitively indigenous, it has only one close native relative, M. pinetorum, with only one pair of pinnae per leaf.
Care must be taken, however, to distinguish M. diplotricha from Mexican and Central American members of ser. Quadrivalves, for which fmits at least in formative stages are almost indispensable.
Mimosa diplotricha is an invasive, proUfic, fastgrowing, and with few exceptions formidably prickly weed, rich in minor variations of stature, leaf-formula, pubescence, and armament.
All its common forms are serially armed along the ribs of stem and leaf-stalk with sharp cat's-claw aculei, but occasional individuals (e.g., Schunke 1115 from Huanuco, Pem, NY) show only a few scattered cauline prickles and unarmed leaf-stalks.
A completely unarmed form (M. invisa fma inermis Adelb.), first noted in Papua New Guinea, is now cultivated for cover and forage in the East Indies and tropical Africa, and is the subject of agronomic studies and breeding programs.
Notable Brazilian variants are represented by Hatschbach 34279 from Goias (NY), which has peduncles to 20 (not 5-14) mm long, and by W. R. Anderson 8803 from Minas Gerais (NY), with abnormally stout pods attaining 32 x 5.5 mm.
An outstanding Mexican form with pods twice as long and seeds twice as many as in normal M. diplotricha is described below as var. odibilis.
Key to varieties of M. diplotricha 1.
Pods mostly 10-25 mm, exceptionally to 32 mm long, (2-)3-8-seeded; range of the species i20a. var. diplotricha (p. 201).
1.
Pods 40-70 mm long, 12-16-seeded; known only from Sinaloa and Michoacan, Mexico 120b. var. odibilis (p. 202).
120a. Mimosa diplotricha C. Wright ex Sauvalle var. diplotricha.
M. diplotricha C. Wright, 1868, Lc, sens. str.-''[Wright] 621 .
.
.
En sabanas enyerbadas de Santa Cmz de los Pinos [Cuba]."-Lectotypus (Bassler, 1985: 602), Wright 3541, GH!; isotypi, K! NY! U S ! - Equated by Bentham, 1875:436 with M. invisa Martius (non M. invisa Martius ex Colla).
M. invisa Martius, Flora 20(2, Beibl.
8): 121.
1837, nom. illeg.—"In aridis, ad vias, locis ruderatis in prov. Sebastianopolitana [Guanabara, Brazil] et Minarum [Minas Gerais]."—Lectotypus (Bameby, Brittonia 39: 50.
1987), Luschnath in Martius, Herb, fl. bras. 172, collected "in valle Broco, XI. 1834," accompanied by Martius's autograph description, BR! = NY Neg. 11560; isotypi, BM! G! K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 11560, M (2 sheets)! WI!-Non Martius ex Colla, 1834.
Schrankia (?) brachycarpa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 2: 130.
1840.-"On the Rio Negro ? Schomburgk, n. 903."-Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 7<S9i.—Equated with the preceding by Bentham, 1846: 436.—Non M. brachycarpa Bentham, 1842.
M. invisa var. echinocarpa Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 556 [=P1. hassler.
412].
1904.- "[Paraguay] ... in dumeto Cordillera de Altos, [Hassler] 3735."—Holotypus, G!; isotypus, W! M. ixiamensis Rusby, BuU.
New York Bot. Gard. 8(28): 91.
1912.-"Ixiamas [La Paz, Bolivia], 1500 ft.,
Dec. 25, 1901 ([R. S. Williams] No. 269)."-Holotypus, NY! = NY Neg. 4989; isotypi, K! US! Morongia pilosa Standley, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 18: 105.
1916.—". .. collected along the Camino del Boticario, near Chepo, Province of Panama, Panama, altitude 30-50 meters, October, 1911, by H. Pittier (no. 4544)."-Holotypus, US 679604\; isotypus, '^^\—Schrankia pilosa (Standley) Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 11.
I919.-Equated with M. invisa by Britton & Rose, 1928: 163.
Mimosa invisa fma inermis Adelbert in Kostermans, Reinwartia 2: 359.
1953 (+antecedent bibliography).—"Java, Bogor, cultivated in the experimental gardens of the Centrale Proefstations Vereiniging. .. at 260 m . .. November 14, 1950, A. J. H. van Haaren s.n. = H. B. 116118."-Holotypus, BO, not seen.—M. diplotricha var. inermis (Adelbert) Verdcourt, Kew BuU.
43: 360.
1988.
M. longisiliqua Lamarck, Encycl.
1: 21.
1783, quoad flor., exclus. typ. fruct.,
based on Breyne, Exot. pi. cent. 1: t. 17.
1678.-Cf Bentham, 1875: 436.
M. invisa sensu Bentham, 1875: 436; 1876: 379, t. 97; Rose & Leonard, J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 17(10): 259.
1927; Burkart, 1979: 144, est. 20 (reproduced from Martius, ¥1. bras.. I.e.); Britton & Killip, 1936: 153; Brenan, 1959: 50; Liogier, 1985: 50; Bassler, 1985: 602; McVaugh, 1987: 212.
M. invisa inermis sensu Troupin, Fl. pi. ligneuses Rwanda 430.
1982.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In pastures, disturbed woodland, in fallow or presently cultivated fields, at forest margins, and becoming weedy on roadsides and in waste places about habitations, in eastem Brazil sometimes in undisturbed cerrado, ascending from coastal lowlands to 1050 m on the Tocantins-Paraguay divide, discontinuously dispersed from n.-e. Argentina (Corrientes, Misiones) and s.-e. Brazil (Sta. Catarina) n.-ward.,
e. of the Andes, to s.- w. tropical Mexico (Nayarit) and the Greater Antilles (Cuba, Puerto Rico, Haiti); Pacific lowland Ecuador; introduced and pestilently weedy in tropical Africa, Pacifica, and tropical n. Australia.—Fl. in S. America I-II onward, fr.
II-VI; fl. in N. America (Ylll-)IX-IY.-Sierrilla (Mexico).
Map 17.
120b. Mimosa diplotricha C. Wright var. odibilis Bameby, var. nov., a var. diplotricha legumine longissimo polyspermo (4-7 cm longo 12-16-spermo nec 1-3.2 cm longo 3-8-spermo) diversa.—Mexico.
Michoacan: dry roadside ±60 km from Temascal on road to Huetamo, 13.
XL1949 (fr), H. E. Moore Jr. (with E. Hernandez X. & H Porras Jr.) 5686.— Holotypus, GH; isotypus, MICH.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
On roadsides and in waste places, known only from tropical s.-w. Mexico (Sinaloa and Michoacan).-R. X-? Map 17.
In length of pod and number of ovules var. odibilis resembles M. quadrivalvis, but the slender replum is that of M diplotricha, from which it seems not to differ in any other character.
Except for the type and Ortega 4903 from Sinaloa (US) all other specimens of M. diplotricha from southwestern Mexico that I have seen are in young flower; some of them may, in reality, represent this unexpected form.
The extremely small size of the unfertilized ovules makes a count difficult and uncertain.
121.
Mimosa supravisa Bameby, sp. nov., ab arete affini M. diplotricha foliomm majorum pinnis 2-4 (nec 4-9)-jugis, pinnamm majorum folioUs 7-14 (nec 17-28)-jugis 1.7-2.6 (nec 0.6- 1.2) mm usque latis, ulterius a var. diplotricha, varietate sola in Brasilia planaltina obvia, leguminis saepe 30-45 (nec 8-24, rarius -32) mm longi 8-14 (nec 3-8)-spermi valvulis villosis sed inermibus (nec cum replo aculeatis) diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Fda.
J. Teles, ± 10 km n.-w. of Formosa, near source of rio Parana, 850 m, 29.
IV. 1966 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Souza, Grear & Reis dos Santos) 75^6^. —Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Weedy diffuse or weakly erect prickly subshrubs akin to M. diplotricha but different in lfformula and pod, commonly villous-villosulous throughout, the stems and If-axes with fine erect hairs to 0.5-1.2 mm, the thin-textured, dorsally pallid lfts with shorter subappressed hairs, exceptionally glabrate, the 4 continuously prominulous stramineous ribs of branchlets and the dorsal and lateral ribs of lf-stks armed with densely or distantly scattered, recurved brown-tipped aculei to 1-3 mm, the small capitula globose, the lower ones axillary, immersed in foliage, some later ones forming a simple pseudoraceme exserted up to 1.5 dm from foliage, usually less.
Stipules erect linear-lanceolate or subsetiform 2- MAP 17.
Mexico, Central America, West Indies, and tropical and warm-temperate South America.
Range in the New World of M. diplotricha Wright.
5.5 X 0.3-0.7 mm, dorsally 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of major cauline lvs (2.5-)3.5-7(-8.5) cm, the petiole with livid pulvinus (1.6-)2-4 (-4.3) cm, at middle (0.25-)0.3-0.7 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 1-2 cm, the ventral groove intermpted between pinnae by an ascending acicular spicule 0.4-1.4(-2) mm; pinnae 2-4-jug., subequilong or moderately accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones (1.6-)2^ cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 7-14-jug., the first pair 1-2 mm distant from green or red-tipped paraphyllidia 0.5-1.2 mm, the blades oblong or narrowly oblong-obovate from obtusangulate or subcordate base, at apex obtuse apiculate, the larger ones 5.5-9 X 1.7-2.6 mm, (2.6-)3-4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, the very slender, weakly pinnate subcentric midrib faintly discolored beneath but not prominulous.
Peduncles (6-)8-30 mm; capitula without filaments (4-)4.5-5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linearoblanceolate less than 1 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx 0.15-0.3 mm, either glabrous or the rim microscopically ciliolate; corolla narrowly vase-shaped (1.5-)1.8-2.4 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave 1-nerved lobes (0.6-)0.7-0.9 x 0.45-0.6 mm, thinly hispidulous or exceptionally glabrous dorsally; filaments pink, weakly monadelphous through 0.2-0.3 mm, exserted 3.5-4 mm.
Pods 2-10 per capitulum, sessile, in profile linear, slightly decurved, 30-45 x 3.7-4.5 mm, 8-14- seeded, the replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, armed along middle rib of both sutures or the ventral one with a single file of laterally compressed recurved aculei to 1-2 mm, the papery greenish or brownish,finaUyfuscous,finelyvUlosulous valves unarmed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 2.5-3.7 mm long; seeds (few seen) obovoid-ellipsoid compressed 2.4-2.8 X 1.6-2 mm, the testa pale buff"or greenish-buff" duU.
MIMOSA BURCHELLII Q MIMOSA DIPTERA © MIMOSA PHYLLODINEA: var. PHYLLODINEA 3 var. PHYLLORRHOEA © MIMOSA SELLOI • MIMOSA SUPRAVISA # 101 Ikai Id M l MAP 18.
Planaltine and s.-e. Brazil.
Ranges of M burchellii Bentham, M. diptera Bameby, M. phyllodinea Bentham, M. selloi Bentham, and M. supravisa Bameby.
In disturbed lowland forest, in regenerating cerrado, and other secondary habitats, ranging from 300 to 1400 m on Chapada dos Veadeiros in e.-centr. Goias, intermptedly widespread over the Brazilian Planalto from the e. slope of Sa. dos Gradaus in s.-e. Para and s. Maranhao s. through upland Goias to the Parana valley in w. S. Paulo and s.e.
Mato Grosso do Sul.~Fl.
IIIV(-?).
Map 18.
Mimosa supravisa is compared in the diagnosis with the habitally similar M. diplotricha, which it resembles particularly in serially aculeate stems and leaf-stalks, and there shown to differ in few pinnae, fewer larger leaflets, and a pod retroaculeate on replum but simply viUosulous on the valves.
In their common BrazUian range these two species are further differentiated by length of pod and number of seeds, these mostly 3-8 in M. diplotricha and 8-14 in M. supravisa.
In habit of growth and in leaf-formula 1991] B A R N E B Y : SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 205 M. supravisa closely approaches M. maracayuensis and some forms of polymorphic M. gracilis.
It differs from M. maracayuensis in armed, not setose stems, and from the randomly armed M. gracilis var, invisiformis in prevailingly less numerous (2-4, not 3-6) pairs of pinnae and ampler leaflets attaining 5.5-9 x >1.5 (not 2-5 x <1.5) mm.
122.
Mimosa selloi (Bentham) Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 436, t. 66 (pod).
1875, based on Schrankia selloi Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 415.
1842.-"BrazU, Sello.''- Holotypus, Sello s.n.,K. (2 sheets)! = NY Negs.
1895, 11647; presumed isotypus, Sello 243, +B = F Neg. 13731 Slender, diffusely ascending or scrambling, prickly suffrutescent herbs 1 m or more, glabrous throughout except for residually pubemlent Ifpulvini, the lustrous brown, obscurely 5-angled stems armed on the low-prominulous ribs, along both dorsal and lateral ribs of lf-stks, and along all ribs of peduncles with files of slender broadbased recurved aculei ±0.4-1.5 mm, the purplish-green, when dry bmnnescent foliage subconcolorous, the subglobose capitula solitary and geminate in If-axils on peduncle shorter than the associated petiole.
5^/pw/^5 linear-lanceolate 1.5- 3 mm, 1-nerved, caducous.
Leaf-stalks 5-10 cm, 3-angulate dorso-laterally, shallowly grooved ventrally, the petiole 3-6 cm, at middle 0.6-1 mm diam., the 1-2 interpinnal segments 1-2 cm, the ventral sulcus bridged between pinna-pairs and there weakly spiculate; pinnae 2-3-jug., the forwardly curved rachis 3-6(-7) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-3.5 mm; lfts 15-20-jug., decrescent proximally, the smaU first pair 1-2.5 mm distant from weak subulate paraphyllidia less than 0.5 mm, the blades narrowly oblong or broad-linear from obtusangulate base, at apex obtuse mucronulate, those at mid-rachis 7-11 x 2-3 mm, 3.5-4.5 times as long as wide, aU smooth and nearly veinless above, beneath finely 3-nerved from pulvinule, the two posterior nerves weak and short, the midrib becoming subcentric beyond mid-blade, often faintly branched above middle.
Peduncles 1.5-4 cm; capitula without filaments 5-6 x 4.5-5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform; bracts minute; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx membranous turbinate-campanulate 0.4-0.6 mm, the deltate teeth 0.1-0.2 mm, sometimes tipped with a minute glandtipped cilium; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 1.9- 2.7 mm, glabrous, the ovate-triangular 1-nerved lobes ±1.2-1.5 X 0.7 mm, scarcely thickened at hooded apex; filaments presumably pink, free to base or almost so, exserted ±3.5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, marginally aculeolate soon after fertilization.
Pods spreading-ascending in an umbellate cluster, in profile broad-linear ± 2 5 - 45 X 6-7 mm, (4-)6-10-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 2-2.5 mm and at apex into a cusp 1-3 mm, the 3-ribbed replum ±0.3-0.5 mm diam., armed along the dorsal rib with a continuous file of recurved stramineous aculei less than 1.5 mm, the lateral ribs unarmed or only remotely aculeolate, the smooth lustrous brown papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, breaking up into free-falling articles 4-4.5 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In campo and disturbed bmsh-woodland, at low and moderate elevations along the Atlantic slope of Brazil from the Paraiba valley in Rio de Janeiro s.-w. to n.-e. Sta. Catarina (Itajai).—Fl.
X-?Map 18.
The only closely related mimosa known to occur on the Atlantic slope of Serra do Mar within the range of M. selloi is the weedy M. diplotricha, clearly distinct at anthesis in 4-7 (not 2-3) pairs of pinnae in larger leaves and in leaflets all much less than 2 mm wide; and in fmit by the sessile pods only 3-5 (not 6-7) mm wide and hispid (not glabrous) facially.
Mimosa supravisa, vicariant to the west, differs in sharply ribbed stems, only 7-14 (not 15-20) pairs of leaffets on the longer pinnae, and a facially villous (not glabrous) pod about 4 (not 6-7) mm wide.
Mimosa selloi and M. suburbana of the Brazilian Federal District are similar in leaf-formula and stipitate pod, but the stipe in M. suburbana is about 4.5- 6 (not 2-2.5) mm long, the stems are sharply trigonous, the capitula are only 3-4 (not 4.5-5) mm in diam., and the leaflets of longer pinnae are 23-31 (not 15-20) pairs.
In revising Argentine Mimosa Burkart (1948: 97) mistook M. gracilis var. leiocarpa for M. selloi, but corrected the error in Flora Ilustrada Catarinense (1979:142-144), where the tme plant of Sello is described.
123.
Mimosa suburbana Bameby, sp. nov., M. diplotrichae habitu, caule intus meduUoso extusque crebre secus angulos reversus aculeato FIG. 9.
Mimosa suburbana Bameby.
A. Portion of flowering stem.
B. Pods.
C. Part of intemode and leafstalk.
D. Leaflets, ventral view.
E. Rower. (B from Oliveira 4; the rest from Irwin 2018.) simulans, ab ea caule argute 3 (nec 4-5)-gono, pedunculis capillaribus, coroUae latius turbinatae lobis ultra medium dissolutis, necnon leguminibus subsolitariis eximie stipitatis glabris 5.5-6.5 (nec 3-5) mm latis diversa.—BrazU.
Distrito Federal: Parque Nacional do Gama ±30 km s.-w. of Brasilia, 1100 m, 2.
III.1968 (fl), Irwin (with Maxwell & Wasshausen) 27075.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, K, LE, NY, P, R, US. Fig.
9.
Slender, diffusely ascending or scrambling subshrubs to ±8-11 dm, the sharply trigonous, internally pithy stems densely armed along ribs with recurved stramineous brown-tipped aculeoli to 0.5-1 mm, otherwise glabrous except for minutely pubemlent If-axes and pulvini, the thintextured lfts bicolored, olivaceous above, pallid beneath, the small globose capitula bome on filiform peduncle either directly from If-axils or on short leafless axillary branchlets, in either case much shorter than subtending If.
Stipules erect or deflexed, narrowly subulate 1.2-2.5 mm, 1-nerved.
Leafstalks (4-)5-8.5 cm, aculeolate dorsally like stem, the subterete petiole 25-55 x 0.5 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 7-14 mm, the pulvini (commonly livid, evidently sensitive) of each pair of pinnae separated by a 1- 2-spiculate bridge; pinnae (3-)4(-5)-jug., subequUong, the rachis 2.5-5.5 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-1.4 mm; lfts 23-31-jug., the first pair 0.8-1.5 mm distant from minute subulate paraphyllidia, except for small proximal pairs subequilong, the blades in outline linear subacute (3.5-)4-7 x 0.75-1.2 mm, faintly 2(- 3)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric, the outer venule(s) expiring weU below mid-blade.
Peduncles (12-)15-30 x 0.1-0.15 mm; capitula globose, without filaments 3-4 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the plumply obovoid flbuds glabrous or minutely papiUose-pubemlent; bracts ovate-elliptic ±0.4-0.65 mm; fls 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate, few distal ones bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate ±0.4-0.5 mm, broadly short-toothed, the orifice beaded with minute reddish granules; corolla reddish, broadly turbinate 2-2.5 mm, the membranous, weakly 1-nerved lobes lanceolate or lance-ovate, distinctly longer than the tube; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.1 mm below glabrous ovary, exserted 3-3.5 mm.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, stipitate, the slender stipe 0.4-6 mm, the piano-compressed body in profile broad-linear from cuneate base, 3 5 ^ 0 x 5.5- 6.5 mm, 8-10-seeded, the subundulate replum 0.2-0.35 mm wide, apiculate distally, armed (sometimes discontinuously) with recurved aculeoli 0.2-0.6 mm, the papery, pale green or at length stramineous, glabrous, exiguously venulose valves low-colliculate over seeds, breaking up when ripe into free-falling articles 4-5 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In disturbed cerrado thickets and at edge of gallery forest, ±950-1100 m, apparently local (but inconspicuous, perhaps overlooked) in Distrito Federal, Brazil (Parque do Gama; Fda.
Fazendeira; road to Unai), to be sought in adj. Goias and far w. Minas Gerais.—Fl.
III-VI(-?).
Map 22.
A slender prickly mimosa resembling common M. diplotricha in habit, M. suburbana is sharply distinguished by trigonous (not 4-5- ribbed) stems, capillary peduncles, corollas lobed to well below middle, and particularly by the pods.
These are bome one or two together in a capitulum and not in dense umbelUform clusters and are slenderly stipitate, not sessile; moreover the valves are glabrous and one third to one half wider.
Mimosa selloi, a close relative with similarly stipitate pods, has subterete or obscurely 5-ribbed stems, only two or three (not in most leaves four) pairs of pinnae, larger leaflets, and capitula excluding the filaments 5-6, not 3-4 mm diam. 124.
Mimosa pinetorum Standley, Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 11: 131.
1932.-"British Honduras: Ravine, Mountain Pine Ridge, El Cayo District, Febmary 21, 1931, //.
7/.
Bartlett 77629."-Holotypus, F! = F Neg. 54772 = NY Neg. 11901; isotypi, MICH! US! Slender, trailing or weakly assurgent, perhaps scrambling subshrub ±1.5 m, armed on 4-5- ribbed, distantly foliate stems and on back of some lf-stks with scattered slender recurved aculei 1-1.5 mm, glabrous except for mdimentary pubemlence on pulvinus and rachis of pinnae and on dorsal face of some proximal lfts, nowhere either setose or glandular, the foliage olivaceous concolorous, the globose capitula solitary in a long succession of If-axils on peduncle either longer or shorter than subtending petiole, ^^/pw/^^ erect, subulate-setiform 1-2 x 0.15-0.2 mm, 1-nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks 1.5^(-4.5) cm, at middle 0.25-0.4 mm diam., spiculate at apex; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 12-31 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-3.5 mm; lfts 8- 10-jug., little graduated, the first pair 1.5-2.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.5 mm, the blades oblong from obtusangulate base, obtuse at apex, the longer ones 8-13.5 x 2-3.5 mm, 3 - 4.2 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath finely weakly 3-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib faintly 2-3-branched on each side, the inner posterior nerve expiring near or below mid-blade, the outer one short and weak.
Peduncles 15-30 mm; capitula at anthesis unknown, presumably globose, the receptacle ± 1 mm diam.; bracts caducous; flowers (only remnants seen) 4-merous 8-androus; calyx membranous campanulate 0.3 mm, the depressed-deltate lobes less than 0.1 mm, glabrous; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.3 mm, the lance-ovate, almost plane, 1-nerved lobes 1.1 x 0.6 mm, thinly setulose above middle; filaments free or almost so, exserted 3.5-4 mm; ovary after fertilization granular.
Pods 1-5 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile narrowly linear, gently decurved (25-)30- 45 X 4.5 mm, 7-11-seeded, the shallowly undulate replum ±0.6 mm wide, produced at apex into an erect cusp 3—4 mm and armed on back and sides with erect aculei ±1.5-2.5 mm, the papery, lustrously greenish-stramineous valves low-convex and thinly randomly aculeolate over each seed, otherwise glabrous but microscopically granular, finely venulose, breaking up when ripe into free-falling articles ±4 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In unrecorded microhabitat but to be expected at forest edge or in disturbed woodland, known only from the Maya Mts. in El Cayo district, Belize.-H. XII-II(-?).
The protologue of M. pinetorum gives no hint of its relationship or probable place in the genus, but Standley can have seen no complete flower and therefore was unable to refer the species to either of Bentham's sections Habbasia or Eumimosa.
In superficial aspect M. pinetorum suggests some form of M. pudica with simply conjugate pinnae, but its stipules are setiform onenerved, the leaflets lack the coarse marginal setae of sect. Eu-mimosa, and spent flowers of the isotype at MICH prove to be diplostemonous.
The species appears to be a geographically isolated member of sect. Batocaulon related to the aculeate Paucifoliatae.
Among these it is unique in reduction of pinnae to one pair, although this feature recurs among unarmed Paucifoliatae in the case of Brazilian M. diptera.
Mimosa pinetorum also bears a suggestively strong likeness to M. (ser. Cordistipulae) piscatorum, which is perhaps artificially separated on account of trimerous flowers.
The type of M. pinetorum differs further, however, from M. piscatorum, known at present only from Venezuela and northeastern Brazil, in somewhat ampler leaffets, longer petioles, and glabrous pod-valves, but all these characters could prove variable when M. pinetorum becomes better known.
125.
Mimosa maracayuensis Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 557. (=P1. hassler.
413).
1904.—"Paraguay .
.
. in campis Ipe hu Sierra de Maracayu, Oct. [Hassler] n. 5086."
— Holotypus, G! = F Neg. 28220; isotypi, BM! K! NY! P! W! M. maracayuensis sensu Burkart, 1979: 147 + map (Sta. Catarina & Rio Grande do Sul).
Herbaceous from slender woody root, the simple or few-branched, prominently costate stems 7-20 dm, pliantly humifuse or weakly assurgent, thinly hispid with widely spreading tapering setae to 2-3.5 mm, these sometimes extending to lf-stks and peduncles, the dry foliage either brownish or pallidly olivaceous, the plane lfts subconcolorous glabrous, the globose capitula long-pedunculate in many successive If-axils, incurved-ascending to vertical.
Stipules spreadingdeflexed submembranous lance-acuminate or -attenuate 4-6.5 x 0.4-1.5 mm, weakly 1-nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks (3.5-)4-8 cm, tapering distally, the petiole (1.5-)2-4 cm, at middle 0.3- 0.7(-0.9) mm diam., openly shallow-sulcate ventrally, the interpinnal segments (5-)6-14(-16) mm; a weak green linear or linear-attenuate spicule between each pair of pinnae; pinnae 3-5(-6)- jug., of many lvs exactly 4-jug., little graduated or the distal ones sometimes shorter, the rachis 13-26 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5- 4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (6-)7-l0-jug., decrescent proximally but otherwise subequilong, the first pair 1-3 mm distant from soft subherbaceous linear-lanceolate paraphyllidia 0.5-0.9 mm, the blades oblong obtuse or deltate-apiculate from broadly obtusangulate or semicordate base, those at mid-rachis 2.6-3 times as long as wide, aU weakly 2-3-veined dorsally from pulvinule, the costa only moderately displaced, scarcely prominulous, a faint discolored but immersed reticulum at times perceptible.
Peduncles solitary and geminate 4-9 cm; capitula without filaments 5-7 mm diam.; bracts linear-oblanceolate membranous 0.6-1 x 0.1-0.2 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, glabrous; calyx short-campanulate 0.2-0.4 mm, minutely deltate-toothed; corolla narrowly turbinate 2.3-3.1 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 1-1.4 x 0.6-0.8 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 3.5- 6 mm.
Pods several per capitulum, sessile, arcuately linear 20-35 x 3.5-6 mm, 5-9-seeded, the undulate replum ±0.7 mm wide, hispidly ciliate with straight or curved yellowish setae to 1-1.5 mm, the valves otherwise smooth glabrous, nigrescent, not seen fully ripe but doubtless breaking up at length into free-falling articles.
In moist campo, scattered at 500-950(-1000) m through the highlands ofw.
Sta. Catarina, Brazil and adj. Parana and Rio Grande do Sul, in lat. 26°-28°S; and apparently disjunct, at slightly lower elevations, along the w. slope of Sa. de Maracayu (including Sa. de Amambay) in lat. 22°-24°S, s.-e. Paraguay.—Fl. in Paraguay X-?,
in BrazU XI-II(-?).
Mimosa maracayuensis appears to me only precariously distinct from M. gracilis var. capillipes in its indumentum of flexuous setae; in habit of growth, leaf-formula and details of flower and pod they are essentially similar.
For the present, however, I follow Burkart's (1979, I.e.) definition and evaluation of the species.
126.
Mimosa gracilis Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 411.
1842.—Typus infra sub var. gracili indicatur.
Herbs from a woody, when young carrot-like but in age knotty and amorphous root, the simple or few-branched, obtusangulately ribbed, diffuse, pliantly humifuse or weakly incurved-ascending stems at anthesis (1-)2-14 dm, unarmed or (locally) aculeolate with scattered recnrved prickles not over (1-)1.5 mm, the whole plant either subglabrous, in subsp. filipes, or, in other subspp.,
the branchlets, lf-stks, lower face of lfts and corolla-lobes hirsutulous with fine straight erect eglandular hairs to (0.3-)0.4-1.2 mm, the stem and lower face of lfts exceptionally (and independently) glabrate but the lfts at least shortly ciliolate, the globose capitula pedunculate in Ifaxils and mostly surpassed by the subtending If or, at end of growing season, the distal ones pseudoracemose.
Stipules linear-attenuate, lanceolate, or narrowly ovate (1-)1.5-5(-6) mm, 1-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leafstalks (1-)2- 8(-9.5) cm, the petiole (0.5-)0.8-5.5(-7) cm, the longer interpinnal segments 4-17 mm, the ventral groove either continuous between pinnae or bridged and weakly spiculate; pinnae divaricate from If-stk at ±90°, 2-, 3-5-, 4-7-, 5-8-, 7-10(- 14)-jug., their rachis 2-30 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.3-1.5(-2.2) mm; lfts (2-)3- 5-, 4-6-, 6-9-, 7-10-, 9-16-jug., the first pair 0.6- 1.6 mm distant from elliptic-subulate paraphyllidia, all insertedjust within narrow rim ofrachis, of subequal length, the blades ovate-, obovate-, or oblong-eUiptic, obtuse or deltately apiculate, the largest of a plant 1.5-6 x 0.8-2 mm, all when dry thin-textured or rather firm, subconcolorous, veinless or faintly l(-2)-nerved dorsally, the midrib subcentric.
Peduncles (0.8-) 1^.5(-6) cm; capitula without filaments 3—4.5(-6) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-oblanceolate or narrowly elliptic 0.4-1.4 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, rarely all bisexual, the lower ones usually staminate and shorter than the rest; calyx campanulate tmncate or obscurely denticulate 0.2-0.4 mm, commonly glabrous, but the rim sometimes minutely ciliolate; corollas narrowly or, when relatively short, more broadly turbinate 1.4-2.6(-3) mm, the ovate 1-nerved, greenishor pink-purple lobes 0.5-1.7 mm; filaments vivid pink or lilac-pink, shortly monadelphous around base of ovary, the longer set exserted 2.5-5.5 mm.
Pods solitary or few per capitulum, sessile, subsessile, or rarely contracted at base into a stipe 1-3.5 mm, in profile linear, straight or nearly so, when well fertilized 25-50(- 60) X 3-5 mm and 5-1 l(-13)-seeded, the smooth or rarely aculeolate replum either straight or shaUowly undulate and 0,45-0.6 mm diam., the firmly papery valves low-convex over seeds, either glabrous sublustrous or densely pubemlent but never aculeolate or setose, when ripe breaking up into free-faUing, individually indehiscent articles 2.4-4.5 mm long; seeds in broad profile rhombic-ovate ±3-3.5 x 2.2-2.7 mm, the testa pale brown or castaneous lustrous.
As defined in the foregoing description, M. gracilis is a polymorphic aggregate that consists of two series, one with more or less obviously pilosulous foliage and ffowers, the other with perfectly glabrous flowers and foliage varying from hairless to residually pubemlent.
Each series is highly variable (but not in precisely the same mode) in leaf-formula and consequently in amplitude and outline of the individual leaf.
Except in minor details of no taxonomic value, the flowers and fmits are extremely uniform.
A century ago Bentham possessed not more than thirteen collections of this group, several of them incomplete, which he disposed of in three species: a glabrous M. filiformis; and pilosulous M. gracilis and M. capillipes, the last composed of three varieties supposedly different in numbers of pinnae and of leaflets per pinna.
These differences are real enough, but are now seen not as discrete character-states but as marking random points on a continuous curve of variation.
Analysis of the leaf-formula in M. gracilis has demonstrated that, while number of leaflets per pinna is relatively conservative or even stabilized within a population, it is otherwise with number of pinnae per leaf-stalk, which tends to vary not only from plant to plant but from leaf to leaf upward along the stem.
Increased number of pinnae commonly accompanies diminished length of tme petiole, as though accessory pairs of pinnae had been added along the petiolar segment of the leaf-stalk.
I here deemphasize number of pinnae per leaf and reorganize the now extensive material, whether glabrous or pilosulous, primarily by length of pinna-rachis and number of leaflet-pairs.
Because size of leaflets varies independently of number and of contiguity along the rachis it is not taxonomically useful in this complex.
The dispersal of the three subspecies of M. gracilis is peculiar.
The known ranges of the two more populous ones, subspp. capillipes and filiformis, are almost coextensive, except that the latter is proportionately rarer on the Brazilian Planalto but becomes more frequent southward.
The subsp. gracilis occurs entirely within that of subsp. capillipes except that it extends to Paraguay, and it is vicariant with subsp. capillipes only in Brazil, in the Federal District and the Triangulo Mineiro.
These facts of dispersal, so far at variance with what is commonly expected of subspecies, suggest that the major categories that I have defined in M. gracilis sens. lat. are not phylogenetically homogeneous, but assem- [VOL.
65 blages of parallel independent mutations from a common predecessor.
If so, they are taxonomic artifacts, categories of convenience.
Key to subspecies of M. gracilis 1.
Stems, lfts and fls pilosulous.
2.
Rachis of longer pinnae 9-30 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 6-16(-18)-jug., if less than 8-jug. then the distal ones over 3 mm long 126/1. subsp. capillipes (p. 210).
2.
Rachis of longer pinnae (1.5-)2-8 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 3-8(-10)-jug., if more than 7-jug. then less than 2.5 mm long 126/11. subsp. gracilis (p. 212).
1.
Stems, lfts and fls glabrous (sometimes traces of puberulence on stipules or lf-stks) 126/III. subsp. filiformis (p. 214).
126/1.
Mimosa gracilis subsp. capillipes (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. capillipes Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 432.
1875 & in Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 371.
1876.- Typus infra sub var. capillipede indicatur.
Stems either pliantly humifuse, or prostrate but distally assurgent, or less often weakly ascending from root-stock, the stems, lf-stks, lower face of lfts and corolla-lobes hirsutulous in variable density with fine straight erect eglandular hairs to (0.3-)0.4-1.2 mm, the stem and lower face of lfts exceptionaUy (and independently) glabrate but the lfts always ciliolate, the prominent stem-ribs either unarmed or aculeolate; leaf-formula iii-ix(-xi)/(6-)7-14(-18), the rachis of longer pinnae 9-32 mm, the lfts when relatively few 3-6 mm long, when over 9-jug. often smaller; peduncles 1 ^ , rarely 4-6 cm.
Range of the species except Paraguay.
The subsp. capillipes is placed first in order under M. gracilis, as it seems to represent unspecialized stock from which subsp. filiformis, differing in glabrous foliage and ffowers, and subsp. gracilis, differing in abbreviated pinnae, arose within parts of its range of dispersal.
The subspecies consists of var. capillipes, somewhat variable in leaf-formula and size of leaffets, and a partly sympatric aculeolate var. invisiformis of local dispersal.
Key to varieties of subsp. capillipes 1.
Stems unarmed; range of the subspecies 126/Ia. var. capillipes (p. 211).
1.
Stems variably prickly, the recurved aculei sometimes few and scattered; nearly but not completely replacing var. capillipes in highland centr. Goias 126/Ib. var. invisiformis (p. 211).
126/Ia. Mimosa gracilis subsp. capillipes (Bentham) Bameby var. capillipes.
M. capillipes Bentham, 1875, 1876, 11. cc, sens, str.— "Habitat in provincia Minas Geraes: Claussen; ad Uberaba et Caldas: RegneU Coll. Ill, n. 509, 509* et 509**; ad Lagoa Santa: Warming; in provincia Goyaz: WeddeU."—Lectotypus, RegneU III/509**, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 11670; isotypus, US!; syntypi, RegneU III/509, K! = NY Neg. 1876, S! US! RegneU ni/509*, K! S! Warming in 1864, US! M. capillipes var. brevifolia Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 372.
1876.—"Habitat prope Estiva prov. Goyaz [±16^*8, 49''W]: BurcheU n. 7490 " - Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1877.
M. capillipes var. microphylla Bentham in Martius, R. bras. 15(2): 372.
1876.—"Habitat prope Lagoa Santa: Warming."
-Holotypus, C! = F Neg. 21874.
M. capillipes sensu Burkart, 1948: 106, fig. 14; 1979: 148-150 (Sta. Catarina).
Leaf-formula iii-ix(-xi)/6-14(-18); other characters of subsp. capillipes except as modified in key to varieties.
In dry or transiently moist campo and at margin of cerrado thickets, sometimes prevalent in disturbed places and along roadsides, ascending on the centr. Brazilian Planalto to 1025(-1380) m, frequent over Goias s.-ward from ±13°50'S but replaced in Distrito Federal by subsp. gracilis, from Goias extending w. into s.-e. comer of Mato Grosso, to centr. Mato Grosso do Sul, e. to both slopes of upper S. Francisco valley in centr. and w. Minas Gerais, s. in Brazil to Parana and immediately adj. Sta. Catarina; Misiones, Argentina.—Fl.
XI-V, and sometimes again, but sporadically, from year-old fmiting stems.
Map 19.
The var. capillipes varies substantially in leafformula and length of pinnae not only between populations but sometimes also serially from leaf to leaf along the stem, which in favorable circumstance may extend more than a meter from the rootstock, becoming progressively less leafy distally.
Number of leaflets per pinna and length of pinna-rachis are poorly correlated, but size and number of leaflets, whether on longer or shorter pinnae, are often reciprocally adjusted, the leaflet-blades becoming ampler with decrease in number.
In southern Goias and the Triangulo Mineiro the distinction that I have drawn between var. capillipes and subsp. gracilis var. gracilis is sometimes arbitrary.
A specimen from Mato Grosso (mun. Rosario do Oeste, de Carvalho & Lewis 2196, NY), unlike all other material of var. capillipes, is perfectly glabrous throughout and would key, in consequence, to subsp. filipes.
In relatively coarse stems and plump capitula it seems, nevertheless, closer to var. capillipes, of which I suppose it to be a minor variant.
In selecting a lectotype for M. capillipes from among specimens cited in the protologue I have preferred RegneU ni/509* from Caldas over the rest because its exceptionally long peduncles seem to have suggested the epithet.
The typus of var. brevifolia is an over-mature plant that had shed its primary cauline leaves.
Its diminished rameal leaves, which have a formula of about ii-iii/11, appear superficially different from those of common var. capillipes, but residual leaf-stks show that early cauline leaves had up to eight pairs of pinnae, like those of modem collections from the same region.
126/Ib.
Mimosa gracilis Bentham subsp. capillipes (Bentham) var. invisiformis Bameby, var. nov., a var. capillipede caulibus saepe rigidiusculis semper hinc inde sparsim debiliter aculeolatis diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros ±15 km w. of Veadeiros, 8.
II.1966 (ff), Irwin (with Grear, Sousa & Reis dos Santos) 7255P.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Leaf-formula ui-vi/8-14; otherwise, except for often stiffer, always at least thinly prickly stems (and at times prickly lf-stks), exactly as var. capillipes.
In cerrado and campo mpestre, (950-)1000- 1600(-l 700) m, locaUy common on Chapada dos Veadeiros in e.-centr. Goias, extending feebly thence s. and s.-w. to n. end of Sa.
Geral do Parana and n. end of Sa. dos Pireneus.—R. X - IV. Map 20.
Following Bentham's classification one would be obliged to refer this mimosa to ser. Asperatae, but it differs extemally from unarmed M. gracilis var. capillipes solely in the acquisition of aculei, sometimes inconspicuous and few in number.
Theoretically it might be supposed to have arisen MAP 19.
Planaltine and s.-e. Brazil and adjoining Argentina.
Range of M gracilis Bentham var. capillipes (Bentham) Bameby. as a hybrid between M. diplotricha and M. gracilis var. capillipes, which are marginally sympatric on the Chapada.
This hypothesis would not account satisfactorily for the abundance of var. invisiformis at elevations above those attained by either supposed parent, nor for its absence elsewhere in their wide common range of dispersal.
In practice M. diplotricha is distinguished from var. invisiformis by denser armament, shorter peduncles, and fertility of almost every ffower in the capitulum, the pods consequently forming a dense cluster close against the stem.
126/11.
Mimosa gracilis Bentham subsp. gracilis.
M. gracilis Bentham, 1842, I.e., sensu paullo ampliato.—Typus infra sub var. gracili indicatur.
Stems either pliantly humifuse and then potentially much elongating, or relatively short and stiff*, then either prostrate or assurgent or densely tufted, never aculeolate; pubescence of subsp. capillipes; leaf-formula ii-x(-xiv)/2-9(-10), the rachis of longer pinnae 2-8 mm; flower and pod of var. capillipes, the pod either glabrous or densely villosulous, but never aculeolate.
This subspecies diff*ers from both the foregoing and the following by abbreviated pinnae and consequently by leaves of proportionately long narrow outline.
The var. gracilis differs sometimes from var. capillipes by length of pinnae alone, but often also by more numerous as well as shorter pinnae.
In var. brevissima leaf-reduction is carried a step further, the longer pinnae being yet shorter than those of var. gracilis and commonly also fewer by at least one or two pairs.
Length of pinna-rachis, number of pinnae, number of leaflets, each varies through a continuum between the average robust var. capillipes and the highly reduced var. brevissima, but the curves of variation are poorly correlated with each othv a r .
GRACILIS# v a r .
INVISIFORMIS Q 111 itM iti a t MAP 20.
Planaltine Brazil and e. Paraguay.
Ranges of M gracilis Bentham var. gracilis and var. invisiformis Bameby. er.
Ambiguous specimens link the three varieties, but are fewest when the arbitrarily chosen measurement of longer pinnae is accepted as the deciding factor.
While var. brevissima intergrades with var. gracilis on the one hand, it is also very closely akin to, perhaps the precursor of, the yet more reduced or ultimately ephedroid, essentiaUy efoliate M. paucifolia, M. piptostegia and M. phyllodinea.
Key to varieties of subsp. gracilis 1.
Rachis of longer pinnae 5-8 mm, always as long as or longer than contiguous segments of If-rachis; lf-formula v-x(-xiv)/(5-)6-9(-10); e. and s.- e. Goias s.-ward from lat. 14°S through Triangulo Mineiro to S. Paulo, feebly e. to centr. Minas Gerais; disjunct in e. Paraguay; rare in the range of the next 126/IIa. var. gracilis (p. 213).
1.
Rachis oflonger pinnae (1.5-)2-5 mm, no longer, mostly shorter than contiguous segments of Ifrachis; lf-formula ii-v(-vi)/2-5; abundant locally over much of Distrito Federal, feebly w. to valley of rio Corumba in Goias 126/IIb. var. brevissima (p. 214).
126/IIa.
Mimosa gracilis Bentham subsp. gracilis var. gracilis.
M. gracilis Bentham, 1842, I.e., sens, str.—"BrazU, Sello, Pohl, Claussen."
, the data expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 372.
1876 to: "in Brasilia interiore vel meridionali: Sello; in provincia Minas Geraes: Claussen; ad Commba ejusdem provinciae: Pohl "-Lectotypus, Pohl 1200 = d.l479, ex parte, collected 1.1819 (fl) at Commba de Goias, K (hb. Hook.,
pi. sinistr.)!; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54836, NY! W!; syntypus, Claussen s.n.,
K!—M. gracilis var. genuina Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 5.
1910, nom. superfl. M. serpens Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 555 (=P1. hassler.
411).
1904.-"[Paraguay] In alto planitie pr. flumen Corrientes . .. [Hassler] n. 5833."-Holotypus, G! = NY Neg. 2823; isotypi, NY! P!—M. gracilis var. serpens (Chodat & Hassler) Hassler + fma hirsutissima Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 6.
1910, nom. superfl. M. serpens var. glabrifolia Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4:555 (=P1. hassler.
411).
1904."
- " [Paraguay] ... in campo Apepu .
.
. [Hassler] n. 4332."—Holotypus, from Tapiraguay, G!; isotypi, NY! P!—M. gracilis var. serpens fma glabrifolia Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 6.
1910.
M. gracilis var. genuina fma longepedunculata Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 5.
1910.-"Paraguay: In campis siccis prope Caaguazu .
.
.
Hassler no. 9268."-Holotypus, G! M. gracilis var. intermedia Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 5.
1910.—"Paraguay: In campis in regione fluminis Ihu.. .
Hassler no. 9534; id. fructif n. PJi'^a."
-Lectotypus, Hassler 9534, G!; isotypi, NY! W! M. gracilis sensu Bentham, 1875: 433; 1876: 372, t. 93 (but glands shown on 4 of 8 anthers, as noticed by Burkart, 1948: 26, but not confirmed in specimens).
Stems typically pliantly humifuse, at maturity 5-12(-14) dm; otherwise as described in keys to subspp. and vars.
In campo sujo and campo cerrado, on the Brazilian Planalto between 700 and 1000 m, uncommon and scattered through the Brazilian range of subsp. capillipes from s.-e. Goias to s.- centr. S. Paulo (Itapetininga), and apparently disjunct at somewhat lower elevations in e. Paraguay.-H. (X-)XI-IV. Map 20.
As defined by key characters var. gracilis is a polymorphic, perhaps genetically heterogeneous variety, poised between subsp. capillipes var. capillipes and subsp. gracilis var. brevissima and intergradient with both.
The type-number, Pohl 1200/dl479 consists of two elements, mounted on one sheet at Kew but separate at Vienna.
The lectotype proposed herein, probable model for plate 92 in Flora brasiliensis, has leaf-formula v-vii/5-6 and pilosulous leaflets; the second element, in bud only, here referred to var. brevissima but in reality only transitional to it, has leafformula iii-vii/3-5 and glabrate leaflets.
Together they illustrate the difficulty of separating neatly or defining exactly any infraspecific component of M. gracilis sens. lat. A collection from near Formosa, Goias (Irwin 15441, 1>^ is ambiguously intermediate in another way between vars. gracilis, of which it has the leaf-formula, and brevissima, of which it has the relatively stiff" stems, and is further remarkable for pods glabrous in some plants and densely pilosulous overaU in others.
In length ofpetiole var. gracilis is as variable as var. capillipes.
126/IIb.
Mimosa gracilis Bentham subsp. gracilis var. brevissima Bameby, var. nov., a var. gracili foliomm pinnis simul paucijugis ac valde abbreviatis, rachi 2-5 mm tantum longa et petioli communis segmentis interpinnalibus breviori vel iis vix aequilonga, foliolisque pinnarum longiomm etiam paucis (saepissime 2- 5-, nec 5-10-jugis) diversa.—Brazil.
Distrito Federal: Brasilia, on w. margin of Lagoa Paranoa, 975 m, 11 .III.
1966 (fl), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 13872. —Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Stems at first anthesis tufted 1-4 dm, later diffusely elongating or humifuse; otherwise as described in keys to subspp. and vars.
In campo sujo and open cerrado subject to periodic fires, 950-1200 m, locally abundant in Distrito Federal, extending weakly w. into valleys of rios Descoberto and Commba in adj. Goias.—Fl.
IX-III, sporadically to VI, fmiting and progressively defoliate (II-)III-IX. Within the Federal District var. brevissima is almost always readily distinguished from var. gracilis by few short, mutually remote and paucifoliolate pinnae.
In the dry season, when the leaflets have dropped but leaf-stalks mostly persist, it superficially resembles allopatric M. phyllodinea, M. paucifolia, and M. piptoptera (under which the differences are briefly discussed).
126/III. Mimosa gracilis Bentham subsp. filiformis (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. filiformis Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 432.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 371.
1876.—Holotypus infra sub war. filiformi indicatur.
Essentially like subsp. capillipes but glabrous except for sometimes vestigially ciliolate stipules and exceptionally (far s.-ward) ciliolate lfts, the flowers always glabrous, the stems humifuse, assurgent or rarely erect, commony but erratically aculeolate, less often unarmed; leaf-formula (i-)iiiv/4-17.
Range of the species.
The varieties of subsp. filiformis are almost everywhere sympatric with some variety of subsp. capillipes or subsp. gracilis, and collectively differ from these only in glabrous foliage and flowers.
The subspecies might be supposed to consist simply of glabrate mutants of the sympatric pilosulous variety, but this is not the case, for where they coincide in range components of any two subspecies differ not only in pubescence but also in habit, or in armature, or in leaf-formula, often to marked degree.
Indeed the subspecies behave, in any particular locality or particular segment of their ranges, as though specifically distinct.
It is only when data are assembled from long suites of specimens that the collective ranges of morphological variation, in everything except vesture, are revealed as fully confluent.
The closely related but still poorly known M. burchellii appears to differ from subsp. filiformis principally in the broad pod (±6, not 3-5 mm wide) composed of longer articles (±6, not 3-5 mm long).
Fmits of this group are, however, too little known to furnish proven taxonomic characters.
Key to varieties of subsp. filiformis 1.
Petioles 3.5-7 cm; lf-formula ii-iii/5-9; Sa. da Anta in w.-centr. Minas Gerais and Sa. do Rio Preto in adj. Goias; stems either humifuse or ascending 126/IIIc. var. longipes (p. 216).
1.
Petioles 1.5-3(-4) cm; If-formulae various; aUopatric to n., e. and w. 2.
Lfts of longer pinnae 9-12-jug.; pod stipitate, and its replum (so far as known) almost straight; range tropical planaltine.
3.
Pinnae 3^-jug.; stems pliantly humifuse; Distrito Federal w. to Sa.
Dourada in s.-centr. Goias.
126/IIIa. var. filiformis (p. 215).
3.
Pinnae 1-3- or exactly 2-jug.; stems stiff, either erect or diffuse; highland centr. Minas Gerais and Chapada dos Veadeiros in e.-centr. Goias 126/IIIb. var. stipitata (p. 215).
2.
Lfts of longer pinnae (4-)5-9-jug.; pod subsessile, and the replum undulately constricted between seeds; range mostly extratropical, from Paraguay in lat. 22°S to n.-e. Argentina and Rio Grande do Sul; stems pliantly humifuse 126/IIId. var. leiocarpa (p. 216).
126/IIIa.
Mimosa gracilis Bentham subsp. filiformis (Bentham) Bameby var. filiformis.
M. filiformis Bentham, 1875, 1876, 11. cc, sens, str.-"Habitat ad Villa Boa [Goias Velho] provinciae Goyazensis: Pohl."
—Holotypus, Pohl 1401, W! = F Neg. 32038.
M. leptocaulis sensu Bentham, 1876: 375, ex parte, quoad char. fmct. et Burchell 7058, typo excluso.
Stems humifuse, either unarmed or remotely aculeolate, 7-10 dm; leaf-formula ii-iv/10-12; pods 30-40 X 4-5 mm, contracted basally into a stipe 1-2 mm, 7-9-seeded.
In campo, 800-1000 m, known only from Sa.
Dourada in s.-centr. Goias and from basin of rio S. Bartolomeu in Distrito Federal.—Fl.
I-III. Map 21.
126/IIIb.
Mimosa gracilis Bentham subsp. filiformis (Bentham) var. stipitata Bameby, var. nov., var. longipedi proxima, sed foliomm petiolo breviori plemmque 1.5-3, rarius 4 cm usque longo necnon legumine basi in stipitem 2.5-3.5 mm longum contracto (nec sessili) diversa.—BrazU.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros ±40 km n. of Alto Paraiso, 24.
III.1971 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Harley & G. L. Smith) 33127. — Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, US. Stems 6-10 dm, in type-locality decumbent, in Minas Gerais erect-assurgent, either remotely aculeolate or rarely smooth; leaf-formula (i-)ii(- iii)/^-ll;pods (in Goias) 30-35 x 4 mm, 7-10- seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 2.5-3.5 mm, the articles 3.5-5 mm long. In thin cerrado and campo mpestre, 850-1250 m, remotely scattered between e.-centr. Goias (Chapada dos Veadeiros) and the w. slope of Sa. do Espinha90 in centr. and n.-centr. Minas Gerais.—Fl.
II-V. Map 21.
This variety and var. longipes are closely akin, but different at anthesis in length of petiole and consequently characteristic foliage.
The type-collection bears a stipitate pod and I associate with it four ffowering collections from Minas Gerais, two from Sa. do Cabral, and two Sa. do Espinha- 90, all of which seem inseparable from it except possibly by more stiffly ascending to erect stems.
The status of these will remain somewhat precarious until their fmit is known.
MAP 21.
Planaltine and s.-e. Brazil, adjoining Paraguay and n.-e. Argentina.
Range of M. gracilis Bentham subsp. filiformis (Bentham) Bameby.
126/IIIc.
Mimosa gracilis Bentham subsp. filiformis (Bentham) var. longipes Bameby, var. nov., inter subspeciei suae varietates petiolorum communium elongatomm petiolo ipso 3.5-7 (nec 1.5-3, raro 4 usque) cm longo singularis.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Sa. da Anta 5 km n. of Paracatu, 5.
II. 1970 (ff, fr), Irwin (with Onishi, Fonseca, Souza, Reis dos Santos & Ramos) 26779.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, NY, R, US. Stems either humifuse or ascending 4-7 dm, remotely aculeolate; leaf-formula ii-iii/5-9; pods subsessile, 30-43 x 4-4.5 mm, 6-10-seeded, the almost straight replum either smooth or densely retro-aculeolate, the articles ±4 mm long. In stony campo and cerrado, 800-1000 m, known only from Sa. da Anta in w.-centr. Minas Gerais and Sa. do Rio Preto in e.-centr. Goias.— Fl.
X I - I L Map 21.
Irwin found in one population plants with pods smooth along the replum and others with replum densely aculeolate.
The latter suggests the pod of M. selloi, but is much narrower.
Similarly armed pods are not otherwise known in M. gracilis.
126/IIId.
Mimosa gracilis Bentham subsp. filiformis (Bentham) var. leiocarpa (Burkart) Barneby, comb. nov. M. selloi var. leiocarpa Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 100, fig. 11.
1948.- "Argentina.
Misiones: .
.
.
Loreto .
.
.
Burkart 15238.
.
.
II-1945."-Holotypus, SI, not seen; isotypus, GH!; paratypi, Jorgensen 3626, BR, NY! Ibarrola 1618, 1937, NY! M. graminiformis Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 555.
1904.—"[Paraguay] inter gramina in campo pr. Chololo in valle fluminis Y-aca, Dec, 1900, [Hassler] no. 6830."—Holotypus, a single stem, G! M. burchellii sensu Chodat & Hassler, 1904: 555; non Bentham.
M. guaranitica Chodat & Hassler, 1904: 556, minore ex parte (Hassler 8135, caeteris exclusis).
M. capillipes var. capillipes sensu Burkart, 1979: 148, ex parte (Smith & Klein 8444).
M. affin. maracayuensi Burkart, 1979: 144.
5'?^m5humifuse 2-6.5 dm, remotely aculeolate or sometimes unarmed; leafformula (i-)ii-iii(- iv)/4-9(-10); pods subsessile, 22-37 x 2.8-4.5 mm, 6-13-seeded, the replum undulately constricted between seeds, the articles 3-3.8 mm long. In campo, mostly below 600 m but ascending in e. Sta. Catarina to 900 m, locally plentiful, sometimes in hard red soils, e. Paraguay s.-ward from rio Apa near 22°S to n.-e. Argentina (Misiones, Corrientes), thence s.-e., perhaps intermptedly, to the sources of rio Iguagu in Sta. Catarina, to upper Pelotas valley in Rio Grande do Sul (Bom Jesus), and n.-e. Uruguay.—Fl.
XI-III. Map 21.
The var. leiocarpa was first described and figured by Burkart in his revision of Argentine Mimosa but was subordinated to the not very closely related M. selloi, a species at that time known to Burkart only through photographs.
His mistake was acknowledged in Flora Ilustrada Catarinense, but he made no disposition of var. leiocarpa other than to suggest that it deserved specific status.
I have failed to disentangle it from the complex of M. gracilis, of which it has the flower and pod, or to distinguish it at any level above that of variety from M. gracilis subsp. filiformis, which is similarly glabrous and commonly remotely aculeolate.
The var. leiocarpa seems barely to differ from var. filiformis in slightly fewer pairs of leaffets, but it ranges far southward, mostly below the tropic line.
It is notable that Burkart, while adhering to Bentham's serial criteria and accordingly referring var. leiocarpa to ser. Asperatae, noted its striking likeness to M. (ser. Leptopodae) capillipes, that is to M. gracilis subsp. capillipes of this account.
I here interpret the fragmentary type of M. graminiformis as an etiolated stem of var. leiocarpa, perhaps drawn out in competition with taller campo grasses.
It has leaf-stalks to 12 cm, petioles to 8.5 cm, interpinnal segments of leafstalk to 2 cm, and pinna-rachis to 12 mm long. 127.
Mimosa burchellii Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 432.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 370, char, ampliat.
1876.-"Habitat inter Concei9ao et Natividade provinciae Goyaz: BurcheU n. 8183."-Holotypus, collected "between S. Bento and rib.
Cangalha [± 12°S, 47°30'W]", K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1875; isotypi, GH! NY! P! Herbaceous from taproot or short woody base, the single or few unarmed stems diffiisely trailing or weakly assurgent, simple or remotely branched, the whole plant glabrous except for thinly or vestigially ciliolate stipules and pinna-rachises, the smooth ribbed stems and thick-textured foliage dark chocolate-brown when dried, the globose capitula axillary and immersed in foliage.
Stipules linearor lance-elliptic 1.5-2.5 mm, obscurely 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2.5-7.5 cm, the slender petiole 2-5 cm, the longer (or only) interpinnal segment 5-16 mm, the ventral groove bridged and spiculate between some or all pairs of pinnae; pinnae 2-4-jug., their rachis 13-23 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1- 3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 6-10-jug., a little accrescent distally, the proximal pair 1-1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia, the blades in outline oblong or oblong-eUiptic, obtuse or apiculate, the longer ones (3.5-)4-7 x (i.5_)2- 2.8 mm, all faintly 2-nerved dorsally, the veins discolored but scarcely prominulous.
Peduncles solitary or geminate 1.5-2 cm; capitula without filaments ±5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-oblanceolate 0.6-1 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus glabrous, the slightly smaller lower ones staminate, the rest bisexual; calyx ±0.2 mm, tmncate; corolla membranous, broadly vase-shaped 1.8-2.2 mm, the ovate, nearly plane 1-nerved lobes 0.8-0.9 mm; filaments pink, united into an obscure stemonozone not over 0.2 mm, exserted 3.5-4 mm.
Pods commonly solitary, subsessile, elongately linear 70- 80 X 6-6.5 mm, the smooth, shallowly undulate replum ±0.7 mm diam., the lustrous purplishbrown papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into 9-10 free-falling articles 8-10 mm long; seeds compressed-obovoid ±6 X 3-3.5 mm, the granular-papillate testa pale brown around perimeter and darker brown on faces, the areole 4-4.5 x 1.6-1.8 mm.
In sandy soil of cerrado or campo sujo, ±800 m, apparently local, known only from the headwaters of rios Manuel Alves and Parana, right affluents of upper rio Tocantins in lat. 11°30'- 14°S in e.-centr. Goias and perhaps immediately adj. Bahia, BrazU.-R. I, IV-V(-?).
Map 18.
Mimosa burchellii is closely related to M. gracilis sensu lato and, being essentially glabrous, is only with difficulty dissociated from M. gracilis subsp. filiformis imless the relatively broad pod, composed of exceptionally long articles, is present.
The thick texture and chocolate-brown discoloration of the leaves, alike in modem collections and Burchell's original gathering, seem also characteristic of the species.
The date of Burchell's collection, in early anthesis, is not recorded.
Irwin collected it also in young ffower and once in fmit in the month of April, later than would be expected of Af. gracilis in upland Goias.
128.
Mimosa pratincola Bameby, sp. nov., M. gracili certe affinis et foliolis glabris cum ejus subsp. filiformi comparabilis, sed foliis sessilibus (pinnamm pari primo juxta rachidis pulvinum inserto) primo intuitu diversa, ulterius a M. gracili var. invisiformi, ad ffuminis Parana fontes copiose obvia, caulibus inermibus, pube e pilis rectis constanti pilosula nulla, necnon habitu hygrophilo distans.—Brazil.
Goias: Mun.
Alto Paraiso, in brejo at 1100 m, ±20 km s. of Alto Paraiso on highway GO-19, 19.11.1975 (fl), W. R. Anderson (with Hatschbach, Barneby & Gates) 77^77.—Holotypus, MBM 35468; isotypi, K, NY, R, RB, US. Unarmed perennial herbs with pliantly humiftise, remotely few-branched stems to ± 1 m, these and the If-axes pubemlent with fine recurved villi to 0.2-0.4 mm, neither pilosulous, nor glandular, nor setulose, the lfts and the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula glabrous, the capitula axillary and distally pseudoracemose.
Stipules lanceolate 2-4 X 0.5-0.8 mm, indistinctly several-nerved.
Leaves sessile, the If-stk 2.5-5 cm, the longer interpinnal segments 4-7 mm, and between pinna-pairs a low-deltate scalelike spicule ±0.4 mm; pinnae 5-8-jug., subequilong, the first pair next to If-pulvinus, the slender rachis 12-20 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 7-10-jug., the first pair 1-1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.4 mm, the blades narrowly oblong or oblong-oblanceolate obtuse ±3-4 x 1 mm, plane, veinless above, beneath faintly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric.
Peduncles heliotropic ± 3- 4 cm; capitula without filaments ±5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-oblanceolate 2-2.5 mm.; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, the lower ones staminate and a little smaller, all glabrous overaU; calyx 0.5-0.7 mm, broadly shortly toothed; bisexual coroUas ±3 mm, the ovate, apicaUy incurved but scarcely callous lobes 1.5-1.8 mm; filaments pink, exserted 4.5 mm; ovary glabrous; fruit unknown.
Prostrate in brejo, the stems threading through grasses and sedges but not adventitiously rooting, known only from the type-locality, at ± 1100 m on the Tocantins slope of Sa.
Geral do Parana near 14°30'S in e.-centr. Goias, Brazil.—Fl.
IIIII(-?).
In habit M. pratincola resembles humifuse forms of M. gracilis sensu lato but differs from all of them in essentially sessile leaves, the first pair of pinnae arising directly beyond the leafpulvinus.
The form of M. gracilis most common in east-central Goias is var. invisiformis, found not in brejo but in campo mpestre and dry cerrado habitats, and this differs further from M. pratincola in at least thinly aculeolate stems and in pilosulous stems and ffowers.
The type-population of M. pratincola was taken from saturated sandy-clay soil of brejo, where it formed extensive carpets of interlacing humifuse stems.
129.
Mimosa gatesiae Bameby, sp. nov., M. gracili Bentham et foliolis 6-8-jugis usque ejus var. gracili proxima, sed habitu laxe caespitoso haud humifuso, foliomm rachi inter quodque pinnamm par spicula parva deltato-apiculata instmcta, pinnamm rachi recurva (nec subhorizontaliter divaricata), foliolis crassiusculis, exsiccatis firmis nigricantibus, necnon corolla glabra diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Mun.
Alto Paraiso, moist campo, 1100 m, 19.11.1975 (ff), W. R. Anderson (with Hatschbach, Barneby & Gates) 11475. -Holotypus, MBM 35466; isotypi, K, NY.—Ibid.,
eadem die, no. 11476.— Paratypi, MBM 35467, NY, UB.
Delicate small-lvd unarmed perennial herbs, glabrous except for minutely cUiolate stipules and pinna-rachises, the wiry, mostly simple stems 1- 3 dm, 0.5-1 mm diam., ascending in a dense tuft from a knotty caudex either terminating or lateral to an oblique woody rootstock to 5 mm diam. or from a thick-topped xylopodium, the globose capitula axillary to and ± equalling the distal lvs, or a few furthest ones forming a shortly exserted pseudoraceme.
Stipules ovate or lanceolate 0.8-1.5 mm, 1-nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks capillary 10-22 mm, the petiole 5-14(-16) mm, at middle 0.2-0.3 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 3-5.5 mm; between each pair of pinnae a minute deltate-apiculate spicule; pinnae 2-4-jug., the retroarcuate rachis 3-7 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 6-8-jug., subaccrescent distally, the first pair 0.5-0.7 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia, in outline narrowly oblong or oblong-obovate, straight or subincurved, at apex obtuse apiculate, the larger ones 2-4 x 0.6-1.1 mm, the blades almost or quite veinless externally.
Peduncles capillary, solitary or geminate 10-18 mm; capitula without filaments 3.5-4.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts elliptic-obovate 0.5-0.7 mm, minutely glandular-ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus glabrous, the lowest staminate and slightly smaller, the rest bisexual; calyx 0.4-0.65 mm, shallowly 4-denticulate; corolla broadly turbinate 1.7-2.5 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 1-1.2 mm; filaments either pale or vivid pink, monadelphous through 0.4-0.5 mm, exserted 2.5-4 mm; ovary glabrous; pod unknown.
In moist campo mpestre near 1100 m, apparently local on Chapada dos Veadeiros in e.-centr. Goias and on the headwaters of rio Torto in Distrito Federal, BrazU.—Fl.
II-III. This elegant dwarf mimosa was first collected in 1895 "entre Bananal et le Rio Torto" in the present Federal District by Glaziou (no. 21059, P!), growing with or close to the related M. gracilis var. brevissima (no. 21058, G, K!).
Glaziou not only confused these two species, but misidentified both (1906: 182) as M. paucifolia.
This allopatric relative differs from M. gatesiae in junceous growth-form, in much longer leaf-stalks (±2-8, not 1-2 cm), and in leaf-formula (i-iii/ 2-3, not ii-iv/6-8).
From undeniably similar and partly sympatric M. gracilis var. brevissima the new species differs in more numerous leaffets (to 6-8, not 2-5 pairs), in characteristically recurved pinnae, and in the deltate interpinnal scale in place of a subulate spicule.
It is my pleasure to dedicate this species, with respect and affection, to Dr. Bronwen Gates, author of an esteemed monograph of Banisteriopsis (Fl.
Neotrop.
Monogr.
30.
1982), who participated in its discovery on Chapada dos Veadeiros.
130.
Mimosa diptera Bameby, sp. nov., inter affines glabritie, caule virgato remote foliato e xylopodio subsolitario erecto, pinnis 1-jugis, foliolis plurijugis, necnon infforescentia laxe anguste paniculata aphyUa insignis.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso: Mun.
Cuiaba, sandstone outcrop at km 83 on highway BR-364, 11.
II. 1975 (ff, fr jun), W. R. Anderson (with Hatschbach, Barneby & Gates) 77ii7.-Holotypus, MBM 35498; isotypi, K, NY.
Slender, remotely leafy, essentially glabrous unarmed herb 9-15 dm, the 5-angular stems erect from a carrot-shaped xylopodium, strictly fewbranched from either below or from beyond middle, at widest point 1.5-2.5 mm diam. and internally pithy, the infforescence a narrow, weakly branched efoliate panicle of very small remote, globose moriform capitula.
Stipules lance-ovate 1-2 mm, atrocastaneous, dorsally 1-nerved, tardily deciduous.
Primary cauline leaves separated by intemodes 6-18 cm, their capillary petiole 3- 6 cm, at middle 0.2-0.3 mm diam., bearing at apex a deltate-apiculate spicule 0.4-0.7 mm in front of the microscopically pubemlent pinnapulvini; pinnae I -jug.,
the slender tapering rachis (2-)2.5^.7 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1-1.7 mm; lfts (12-) 15-23-jug., the small first pair 1- 1.5 mm distant from subulate livid paraphyUidia, the blades narrowly oblong, obscurely curved forward, 3-6.5 x 0.7-1.8 mm, all faintly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the costa only slightly displaced from center.
Peduncles capillary 8-12 mm; capitula less than 20-fld, without filaments 3-4 mm diam.; bracts obovate-oblanceolate 0.7-1 mm, minutely denticulate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus glabrous; calyx 0.4-0.8 mm, shallowly 4-denticulate; corolla turbinate 1.7-2.8 mm, the ovate membranous 1-nerved lobes 0.9-1.5 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through ±0.1 mm, exserted 2.5-3.5 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, stipitate, the stipe 3.5-4.5 mm, the broadly linear, planocompressed body 30-55 x 5-6 mm, 3-12-seeded, the smooth straight or undulately constricted replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, the smooth, stiffly papery, purplish-castaneous valves lowcolliculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into many almost square or fewer elliptic, freefalling articles; ripe seeds not seen.
On sandstone outcrops at ±650-700 m, apparently local, known only from Chapada dos Guimaraes and Sa.
S. Louren^o in s.-centr. Mato Grosso and from Sa. do Caiap6 in adj. s.-w. Goias, lat. 15°20'-17°30'S, BrazU.-R. I-III. Map 18.
Mimosa diptera is amply distinct from all other unarmed Paucifoliatae in the solitary pair of pinnae consisting of numerous (12-23) pairs of small crowded leaflets.
The taU slender, remotely few-leaved stem and the relatively long stipe of the pod are equally distinctive in the series.
131.
Mimosa multiceps Bameby, sp. nov., inter affines foliomm formula ii-iii/2-3, foliolis majusculis inter se dissitis, petiolis communibus teretibus capitulisque majusculis absque filamentis 6-7 mm diam. notabiUs.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso: in cerrado 15-120 km beyond Alto Araguaia on road to Cuiaba, 25.
VIII.1963 (fl), B. Maguire (with Pires, C. Maguire & N. T. Silva) 56275.-Holotypus, NY; isotypi, RB, VEN.
Glabrous herbs, the stout, almost simple castaneous stems apparently erect from woody root, near middle ± 3 mm diam., the few paucipinnate and paucifoUolate lvs much surpassing the paired and fasciculate axillary peduncles.
Stipules narrowly lanceolate 1.5-3 mm, 1-nerved.
Leafstalks 5-9.5 cm, subterete, the petiole proper 3.5-5.5 cm, the longer or single interpinnal segment 1.5- 2 cm; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae 2-3(-4)-jug., the rachis 1-2.4 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 3.5-8 mm; lfts 2-3-jug., the first pair 4-8 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia, in sleep folded subvertically over rachis but not or scarcely imbricated, the dark-olivaceous blades a little accrescent distally, in outline obliquely obovateelliptic from semicordate base, the larger ones 8-11 X 4-6.5 mm, all veinless above, weakly 3- 4-nerved dorsally, the midrib only slightly displaced, secondary venules few and faint.
Peduncles (1-)2-l per If-axil, 2-5.5 cm; capitula subglobose, without filaments ± 6-7 mm diam., the claviform receptacle ± 1 mm; bracts linear-oblanceolate 0.8-1.2 mm; flowers 4-5(-6)-merous diplostemonous, glabrous; calyx campanulate 0.3-0.6 mm, the orifice tmncate or shallowtoothed; corollas mostly bisexual, turbinatecampanulate 2.8-3.2 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes ± 1 mm; filaments pink (drying yellowish), fused at base into a necklike stemonozone 0.3- 0.7 mm, exserted 5.5-7.5 mm; ovary glabrous, at early stage of maturation sometimes minutely granular laterally.
Pods to five per capitulum, subsessile, in profile linear, erratically decurved, when fully fertile attaining 70 x 7 mm, 10-13- seeded, the smooth replum 0.5-0.7 mm wide, shallowly constricted between seeds, the brown, finely reticulate glabrous valves low-colliculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into freefalling articles ± 5 mm long; seeds not seen.
In cerrado, on sandy substrates, ±250-600 m, apparently local at lat. 17°-18°30'S in s.-e. Mato Grosso (n.-w. of Alto Araguaia) and adj. Mato Grosso do Sul (mun. Coxim), Brazil.—Fl.
VIVIII.
Map 22.
In habit M. multiceps stands between the erect, ephemerally leafy M. piptoptera and the more conventional, diffiise and permanently foliate species such as M. gracilis sens, lat., or M. burchellii.
In this context it is readily distinguished by leaf-formula, subterete leaf-stalks, relatively ample leaflets, and plump capitula.
The flowering season, June to August, is further remarkable.
The tender texture of the leaves that accompany flowers suggests rapid growth from a xylopodium such as occurs in Chamaecrista claussenii (Benth.) I. & B., also a cerrado subshmb flowering in the dry season.
In the available sample the flowers appear to be normally tetramerous, a few pentamerous; and I found in Hatschbach 33176 (NY) one hexamerous flower with 12 stamens and two gynoecia.
132.
Mimosa piptoptera Bameby, Brittonia 37: 145, fig. 9A-C. 1985.-"BrazU.
Bahia: in drainage of rio Corrente, 7 km S of rio Piau, ±150 km SW of Barreiras, 13 Apr 1966 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 7^697."-Holotypus, UB!; isotypi, C! G! K! LE! NY! P! R! S! US! Fig.
10A-C. M. phyllodinea var. acicularis Bentham in adnot.,
Martius 1753, M! Sparsely leafy, in fmit leafless ephedroid, erect or stiffly ascending suffrutescent herbs from carrot-like root, at anthesis (1-)2.5-7 dm, commonly glabrous throughout but the stipules, distal branchlets, young lvs and fls sometimes thinly viUosulous with fine erect hairs to 0.25-0.6(-0.7) mm, and the branchlets or lf-stks microscopically granular, the stiff" ribbed stems repeatedly branched upward, the lf-stks early naked, the capitula shortly pedunculate in distal If-axils, not pseudoracemose.
Stipules firm, ovate or lanceolate 1.5-2.5(-3) mm, dorsally 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaves strictly ascending (3.5-)5-l 1 cm, the petiole (2.5-)4-9 cm, at middle (0.4-)0.5-l.l mm diam., the rachis 4-25 mm, the longer (or only) interpinnal segment 4-17 mm; pinnae (1-)2-3-, of most lvs exactly 2-jug., their rachis 2-12 mm, the first pair of lfts l-3(-4) mm distant from minute paraphyllidia, the longest interfoliolar segments 0.6-2.6 mm; lfts 2-4(-5)-jug., distally JB" 34° X, 4^^ ^ X W MIMOSA MULTICEPS • MIMOSA PAUCIFOLIA: var. PAUCIFOLIA C var. SCOPARIA 3 MIMOSA PIPTOPTERA 0 MIMOSA SUBURBANA© 101 I b i III » • M MAP 22.
Planaltine BrazU.
Ranges of M multiceps Bameby, M. paucifolia Bentham, M. piptoptera Bameby, and M. suburbana Bameby. accrescent, in outline obliquely obovate or oblong-oblanceolate obtuse or obscurely deltateapiculate, the largest (often the penultimate) pair 2.5-6.5 X 1.2-3.5 mm, the rather thick-textured blades faintly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric.
Peduncles solitary or 2(-3) together, 1-2.5 cm; capitula globose, without jilaments 4-5 mm diam., the claviform receptacle 1-2 mm; bracts linear-oblanceolate acute ± 1 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate, the rest bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.3-0.4 mm, its rim obscurely lobulate; corolla membranous turbinate-campanulate 2.1-2.4 mm, the ovate glabrous or extemally pubemlent lobes 0.9-1.3 mm; filaments pink, united through 0.1-0.2 mm, exserted 3-4 mm.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 80) 1-2 per capitulum, subsessile, linear acuminate at both ends 30-57 3mm.
FIG. 10.
Mimosa piptoptera Bameby (A-C) and M. campicola Harms var. planipes Bameby (D, E).
A. Habit.
B. Leaf C. Flower (aU from Harley 21941).
D. Leaf E. Part ofpetiole. (Both from Irwin 30880.) X 3-4.5 mm, the undulate unarmed replum ±0.5 mm wide, the firm brown glabrous lustrous valves either smooth or venulose, low-colliculate over each seed, tardily breaking into 5-8(-9) free-faUing, oblong-eUiptic articles ±4.5-6 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
On sandy or stony flats and hillsides in cerrado, (300-)450-l 000 m, locally plentiful along the crest and higher e. slope of Espigao Mestre in w. Bahia between 11°30' and 14°S, thence s. (in thinly villosulous form) to Sa, Geral do Parana and extreme n. Distrito Federal, e. across the S. FranCisco valley to Sa. do Gentio in n.-centr. Bahia, and n. (perhaps intermptedly) to the Balsas valley near 7°30'S in s. Maranhao and adj. Piaui.— ¥1.
II-V; fr.
IV onward.
Map 22.
Mimosa piptoptera is most closely related on one hand to M. paucifolia and on another to M. gracilis var. brevissima.
It differs from both in stiff" ascending stems, from M. paucifolia further in leaffets 2-4-, not exactly 2-jugate and up to 2.5-6, not 1.5-3 mm long, and from var. brevissima further in longer leaf-stalks and proportionately much longer tme petioles (for measurements see key to species of Paucifoliatae).
133.
Mimosa paucifolia Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 412.
1842.—Typus infra sub var. paucifolia indicatur.
Densely tufted ephedroid perennial herbs from woody root and multicipital (at times fire-pruned) caudex, glabrous throughout except for sometimes minutely ciliolate stipules and pubemlent gynoecium, the very numerous, distally branched, pliant lustrous stems 2-4.5 dm, to 0.5-1.2 mm diam., the capillary lf-stks to 0.2-0.3 mm diam. bearing at or toward apex l-3(-^) small caducous pairs of 4-6-foliolate pinnae, the small globose capitula solitary in upper If-axils on peduncle shorter than subtending If.
Stipules linear, subulate or narrowly ovate 0.6-2.5 mm, 1-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-8 cm, the petiole 2-6 cm, the interpinnal segment(s) 3-10 mm, obscurely sulcate; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae l-3(-4)-jug., their recurved rachis 1.5-4 mm, the interfoliolar segment(s) 0.2-0.8 mm; lfts 2(-3)- jug., accrescent distally, in outline obliquely obovate or oblong-obovate, obtuse or deltately apiculate, the distal pair 1.5-3 x 0.7-1.2 mm, all plane glabrous, faintly l(-2)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric.
Peduncles capillary 1.5-4.5 cm; capitula without filaments 3.5- 5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts oblanceolate or elliptic-obovate 0.4-0.9 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the smaU lowest ones staminate, the upper ones bisexual; calyx membranous 0.2-0.4 mm, the subundulate rim naked; corollas 1.2-2.3 mm, in outline turbinate or vase-shaped the membranous reddish ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.7-1.2 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.5-1 mm, exserted 2.5- 5 mm.
Pods (of var. scoparia, that of var. paucifolia not seen) ascending, the stipe 1.5-2.5 mm. the linear compressed, straight or gently decurved body ±20-25 X 2.5-3 mm, the smooth, shallowly undulate replum 0.3-0.4 mm diam., the papery pubemlent valves low-coUiculate over each seed, when ripe disarticulating into (4-)5- 7 oblong-elUptic articles ±3.5 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
Mimosa paucifolia is notable for dense tufts of capillary or pliantly grasslike stems and petioles, and for reduction of leaves to a threadlike stalk bearing well above middle one to three, rarely four pairs of diminutive 6-foliolate pinnae.
It is related on the one hand to M. piptoptera, which differs in stouter, stiffly ascending or erect stems and somewhat better developed pinnae, and on the other to M. phyllodinea, different in grossly dilated leaf-stalks.
This vicariant trio is closely connected by way of M. piptoptera to M. gracilis sens. lat. and kindred microspecies.
Two varieties of M. paucifolia can be recognized.
Key to varieties of M. paucifolia I. Pinnae of at least some lower lvs 2-3(-4)-jug.; paraphyllidia inserted on pinna-rachis 1-2 mm from pulvinus and not over 0.5 mm below first pair of expanded lfts; w. Minas Gerais and e. S. Paulo 133a. var. paucifolia (p. 223).
1.
Pinnae of all lvs exactly 1-jug.; paraphyllidia inserted on pinna-rachis next to pulvinus and 1.2- 3 mm distant from first pair of expanded lfts; Sa. do Cabral in centr. Minas Gerais 133b. var. scoparia (p. 224).
133a. Mimosa paucifolia Bentham var. paucifolia.
M. paucifolia Bentham, 1842, I.e., sens, str.—"Brazil, Pohl.'\ the data expanded in Martius, ¥1. bras. 15(2): 373.
1875: "Habitat in provincia Minas Geraes ad Oliveira et Formigas [near Rio Grande-Rio S. Francisco watershed at ±20°30'S, 45°W in s.-w. Minas Gerais],"-Holotypus, Pohl 424 = 1465, K!; isotypus, W! = F Neg. 32044.
M. paucifolia sensu Bentham, 1875: 433.
Characters as given in key to varieties; capitula 4-5.5 mm diam.; calyx 0.4 mm and bisexual corollas ±2-2.3 mm; filaments exserted 4-5.5 mm.
On sandy campo subject to fire in the dry season, ±700-900 m, encountered in w. Minas Gerais (between Oliveira and Formiga; Uberaba) and in e. S. Paulo (between Uberaba and Franca; Itu) by St. Hilaire, Riedel and Lund, Pohl, RegneU, and Burchell, but apparently by no modem collector.—Fl.
VIII, X-II, the full season not documented.
Map 22.
133b. Mimosa paucifolia Bentham var. scoparia Bameby, var. nov., a var. paucifolia pinnis exacte l(nec 2-3)-jugis, paraphyllidiis juxta pinnae pulvinum (nec ab eo 1.2-2 mm semotis) insertis, coroUisque subminoribus parum diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: summit of Sa. do Cabral near 1200 m, ±7 km w. of Joaquim Felicio, 7.
VIII.1970 (fl + fr immat.), Irwin (with Fonseca, Souza, Reis dos Santos & Ramos) 277^5.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, F, IAN, K, LE, NY, P, R, RB, S, US. Characters as given in key to varieties; capitula 3.5-4 mm diam.; calyx 0.2-0.25 mm and bisexual corollas 1.2-2 mm; filaments exserted ±2.5 mm.
In brown sandy soil of campo near 1200 m, known only from the heights of Sa. do Cabral (± 17°45'S, 44°20'W) in centr. Minas Gerais.
Map 22.
The mildly aberrant features of var. scoparia, first described from Irwin's collection made in 1970, have been confirmed by a second gathering (CFCR 6392) from the type-locality.
133bis.
Mimosa sp., ex Irwin 23843 (G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, UB, US) imperfecte nota.
Functionally herbaceous from enlarged woody root, except for minutely ciliolate stipules and floral bracts glabrous throughout, eglandular, the erect, strictly few-branched, obtusely ribbed smooth purplish stems 5-8 dm tall, early defoliate below middle, finely openly foliate distally, the very small globose capitula solitary in If-axils on subfiliform peduncles shorter than subtending If.
Stipules lance-ovate 1.5-2 mm, 1 -nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks subterete capillary 25-35(- 40) mm, the petiole 17-27(-30) mm, at middle 0.2-0.25 mm diam., the one interpinnal segment 6-9(-l 1) mm (not less than V s as long as petiole); a minute or obsolescent spicule between first pair of pinnae; pinnae 2-jug., the rachis 5-11 mm, the interfoliolar segments l-2(-2.3) mm; lfts 3- 5-, of most pinnae exactly 4-jug., distally accrescent but the penultimate usuaUy largest, the first pair (2.5-)4-6 mm distant from minute paraphyllidia, all in outUne obliquely elliptic or obovate-eUiptic from asymmetrically rounded base, at apex depressed-deltate and apiculate, the penultimate pair 3.5-6.3 x 1.5-2.2 mm, 2-2.8 times as long as wide, all faintly 2-nerved dorsally, the midrib only a little displaced, the posterior nerve short.
Peduncles 12-20 mm; capitula without filaments ±4 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts oblanceolate 0.3-0.4 mm, subpersistent; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, not seen fully expanded, those of specimens available teratologically deformed, pedicellate, with subherbaceous perianth, and some of these giving rise to a proliferous umbelUform cluster of barren florets; expanded androecium and/?o<^unknown.
In cerrado at 1000 m, 20 km w. of Montes Claros on road to Agua Boa, Minas Gerais, Brazil, scarcely beginning to flower on 24 Febmary 1969.
In capillary leaf-stalks and few pairs of leaflets crowded along the distal half of the pinna-rachis this imperfectly known but almost certainly distinct species resembles M. paucifolia, but it is a taller, stiffly erect plant with shorter petioles and mostly 4 (not 2) pairs of leaffets to each pinna.
Efforts should be made to collect mature healthy material.
134.
Mimosa phyllodinea Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 412.
1842.-Holotypus infra sub var. phyllodinea indicatur.
Tufted herbs 2-4.5 dm, the many diffuse or ascending stems from a short caudex surmounting a carrot-shaped woody root, when mature resembling a coarse grass, either lacking lfts entirely or the small ephemeral pinnae early deciduous from tip of elongate tapelike phyllodial lfstks, appearing glabrous but the peduncles, lfts and corolla-lobes commonly thinly villosulous with fine erect hairs to 0.4-0.7 mm, nowhere glandular, the small globose capitula either all axillary and much surpassed by lf-stks or some later ones forming an exserted pseudoraceme.
Stipules lanceolate or subulate 1.5-3 mm, 1-nerved dorsally.
Leaf-stalks 7-15 cm, transversely dilated and bifacial, at middle (0.6-)0.9- 2.3 mm wide, coarsely 5-9-nerved, at apex tipped with a small triangular-subulate appendage and a pair of scales (mdimentary pinnae) with a small spicule between them, or some (most) of them bearing l(-2) pairs of pinnae 3-12 mm; rachis of pinnae 2-7 mm, the proximal pair of lfts 1- 2 mm distant from minute paraphyllidia, the longer (or only) interfoUolar segment 0.6-1.7 mm; lfts 1-3-, 2-5-jug., accrescent distally, in outline obovate or narrowly oblong-oblanceolate 1.5-5 X 1-2 mm, almost imperceptibly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric.
Peduncles 8- 35 mm; capitula without filaments 4.5-5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linearoblanceolate or -spatulate 1-1.5 mm, distally ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lowest staminate; calyx 0.3-0.4 mm, glabrous or minutely ciliolate; corolla membranous, broadly or narrowly turbinate-campanulate 1.7-2.9 mm, the ovate reddish lobes 0.8-1.1 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.4-0.6 mm, exserted 4.5-6 mm.
Pods commonly one per capitulum, subsessile, in profile linear 30-37 x 4-5 mm, the smooth, shallowly undulate replum 0.5-0.7 mm diam., the firm purplish-brown glabrous valves low-convex over each seed, when ripe breaking up into (4-)5-7 oblong-eUiptic or almost square, individually indehiscent articles 3.5-5.5 mm long; seeds (few seen) ±3.5-4 x 3 mm, the testa brown, paler toward the margins, moderately lustrous.
A singular mimosa, readily recognized by the transversely dilated, parallel-nerved tapelike leafstalks, some of which bear at tip one or exceptionally two ephemeral pairs of pinnae, the plant in the dry months becoming leafless and ephedroid.
The range of M. phyllodinea is bicentric and a perceptible difference between the populations in the two foci of dispersal is taxonomically recognizable.
Key to varieties of M. phyllodinea I. Lvs all reduced to phyllodes or a few of them tipped with 1 pair of minute 2-4(-6)-foliolate pinnae; s.-e. Goias (Sa. dos Cristais and Contraforte Geral) 134a. var. phyllodinea (p. 225).
1.
Lvs when young all or mostly tipped with 1-2 pairs of pinnae, these 4-10-foliolate; n.-centr. Minas Gerais.
.
134b. yzx. phyllorrhoea (jp.
215).
134a. Mimosa phyllodinea Bentham var. phyllodinea.
M. phyllodinea Bentham, 1842, I.e., sens, str.—"Brazil, Pohl.'\ the data elaborated in Martius, R. bras. 15(2): 374.
1876: "in Serra dos Christaes, provinciae Goyaz."
—Holotypus, Pohl 817 = d.l466, K(hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1880; isotypi, F! NY! US! W! M. phyllodinea sensu Bentham, 1875: 433; 1876, t. 94; Glaziou, 1906: 182.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
On stony hillsides and in flat campo, on sandstone, 900-1200 m, local, recorded only from the divide between rios Commba and S. Marcos, from Sa. dos Cristais s. to vicinity of Catalao in lat. 16°30'-18°S in s.-e. Goias, BrazU.-Fl.
XIIII.
Map 18.
Bentham described M. phyllodinea as glabrous, but most plants now known, including the isotypus at NY, have thinly pubescent peduncles, perianth, and leaflets.
134b. Mimosa phyllodinea Bentham var. phyllorrhoea Bameby, var. nov., a var. phyllodinea petiolis fere omnibus ipso apice vel apicem versus pinniferis, pinnis 1-, rarius 2-jugis, cujusque pinnae foliolis 2-5(nec l-2)-jugis, ulterius patria remota diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: ±30 km n.-e. of Francisco Sa on road to Salinas, 1100 m, 10.11.1969 (fl), Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 22958. — Holotypus, UB; isotypus, NY.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In habitat of var. phyllodinea, 1000-1100 m, local on and near the crest of Sa. do Espinha^o between 16° and 17°S in n.-centr. Minas Gerais (vicinity of Montes Claros and Francisco Sa).— H. II-III(-?).
Map 18.
135.
Mimosa equisetum Bameby, nom. nov. M. heterophylla Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 7: 354 + fig. 1907, nom. illeg.-"[Paraguay] .
.
. in campis siccis, in regione fluminis Yhu, flor. mens. Sept. Hassler n. 9486."—Holotypus, G! = F Neg. 28213; isotypi, K! NY! P! W!—NonM. heterophylla hamarck, 1783; nec Roxburgh, 1832.
Small unarmed, wholly glabrous, loosely tufted herbs of idiosyncratic growth-form and foliage, the simple stems 1-3 dm either erect or incurved-ascending from a shortly branched subterranean caudex, bearing at crowded nodes up to or beyond middle delicate 1-jugate paucifoliolate lvs and axillary peduncles, thence densely crowded subfiliform, at first red-orange but later greenish efoliate lf-stks forming a sterile grasslike terminal tuft, the solitary peduncles a little longer than or equalling the associated If, the capitula globose.
Stipules submembranous, those of lower lvs narrowly lance-subulate 1.5-2.5 mm, 1 -nerved, persistent, those of distal lf-stks subsetiform shorter.
Leafstalks of perfect lvs 1.5- 2.5 cm X 0.2-0.3 mm, shallowly open-sulcate ventrally, espiculate; distal phyllodial lf-stks of same girth but 3-9 cm, shortly appendaged at apex and sometimes bearing 1-2 minute scales in place of pinnae; pinnae of perfect lvs 1-jug., the rachis 2.5-6 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-1 mm; lfts 2-4-jug., the first pair 1-1.5 mm distant from the scarcely differentiated pulvinus, the paraphyllidia reduced to minute papillae or 0, or one of them resembling a minute 1ft; blade of lfts obovate or elliptic-oblanceolate 2.2-4.5 x 1-1.8 mm, at base obliquely cuneate or narrowly obtusangulate, at apex obtuse acuminulate, all veinless above, the subcentric midrib discolored dorsally but immersed.
Peduncles 2.5-5 cm, strongly compressed; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-elliptic 1 mm long or less; flowers 4-5- merous diplostemonous, some lower ones staminate; calyx 0.4-0.5 mm, the deltate teeth 0.15- 0.2 mm; corollas turbinate 3-3.5 mm, the membranous ovate, nearly plane lobes 1.1-1.4 x 0.8 mm, densely pallid-papillate around margin; filaments pink, monadelphous through ±0.5 mm, exserted 6-7.5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous; pod unknown.
In seasonally dry campo subject to periodic fire, ±400 m, known only from the Yhu—Monday watershed on the Paraguay Plateau shortly s. of 25°S, 56°W in depto. Caaguazu, Paraguay.— Fl.
IX-X. Hassler (I.e.) eloquently described his surprise at discovering this peculiar little mimosa ffowering in early spring on campo burned the preceding fall.
The perfect but greatly simplified lower leaves with axillary peduncles all crowded along the lower half or two thirds of the stem and concealed by a terminal plume of extremely fine grasslike phyUodia are unmatched in the genus.
Hassler found the young phyUodia orangered turning green in age, and likened them in mass to some species of horsetail (Equisetum).
The only plausible relationship of M equisetum seems to lie in the direction of M. paucifolia, M. piptoptera and M. phyllodinea, all endemic to planaltine Brazil, but it may nevertheless have arisen independently of these from a more generalized ancestor, perhaps akin to M. gracilis sensu lato.
136.
Mimosa flabellifolia Bameby, sp. nov., herbacea e xylopodio, foliomm axibus primario ut secundariis valde abbreviatis vix 1 mm longis, pinnis 1-jugis, foliolis anguste obovatis 1-2-jugis cum proximali impari ab omnibus diversa, fforibus hucusque ignotis sed legumine cum Paucifoliatis sympatricis bene congruens.—Brazil.
Goias: en campo cerrado em solo concrecionario, proximo a Pindorama de Goias, 21.
IV. 1978 (fr), Roberto P. Orlandi 77.—Holotypus, RB 191705 (2 sheets, one = NY Neg. 12393).
Erect glabrous herbs 2-3.5(-"5") dm tall from stout xylopodium 1-1.5 cm diam., the sharply angulate stems simple or few-branched, rather densely foliate (but the lvs caducous) with subsessile reffexed lvs, the foliage when dry dark brown concolorous, the shortly pedunculate capitula forming a lax terminal pseudoraceme, the lowest ones subtended by a If, the upper bracteate.
Stipules minute subulate, less than 0.5 mm, persistent.
Leaf-formula 1/1.5-2.5, the proximal anterior 1ft commonly lacking, the primary and secondary If-axes contracted and not over 1 mm, each terminating in a recurved subulate appendage, the paraphyllidia conspicuous, the lfts narrowly obovate obtuse, the distal pair to 5-7 x 2.5-3.5 mm, all veinless or almost so.
Peduncles solitary, in fmit ±8 mm; flowers not seen.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, the slender stipe 3-4 mm, the (1-)2-5-seeded body narrowly oblong in profile ±25-30 X 8 mm, the shallowly constricted replum ±0.5 mm diam., the valves papery, lividbrown sublustrous, umbonulate over each seed, the oblong-eUiptic free-falling articles 8-12 mm long. In campo cerrado, near 600-700 m, known only from the sources of rio de las Balsas near 11°15'S, 47°30'W in e.-centr. Goias.-Fr.
IV. Because the ffower is not yet known, the systematic position and relationships of this remarkable mimosa remain to be demonstrated, but it will likely prove to belong to ser. Paucifoliatae, a group highly diversified in campo habitats of the Brazilian Planalto, where it has undergone strange and unexpected modifications of foliage.
Within ser. Paucifoliatae, as indeed in the genus as a whole, M. flabellifolia may be known by the seemingly sessile leaves consisting of one pair of pinnae each of which bears one or two full pairs and one odd posterior leaffet, all crowded on a secondary axis not over 1 mm in length.
Apart from the leaf-formula, the habit, the angulate stems rising erect from a xylopodium, and the terminal pseudo-raceme of craspedia suggest kinship with M. piptoptera.
B(xvi).
Series G L A N D U L O S A E (Bentham) Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Glandulosae (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. sect. Habbasia ser. Asperatae *** Glandulosae Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 437.
1875, ex parte.—Sp. lectotypica: M. orthocarpa Spruce ex Bentham.
M. XXVI.
Calderoniae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 145, in clave.
1928.—Sp. unica: M. calderonii Britton & Rose = M. orthocarpa Spruce ex Bentham.
M. XXVII.
Corynadeniae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 145, in clave.
1928.-Sp. unica: M. corynadenia Britton & Rose.
Slender microphyllidious shrubs of seasonally moist habitats, almost always armed with scattered, straight or gently curved (but not serial cat's-claw) aculei.
Pubescence of minute villi, gland-tipped setulae and occasionally of fine plain setae (but these not basally dilated), the glandtipped setulae always present but variable in length and density.
Stipules lanceolate, subulate or setiform, 1-nerved, less than 1.5 mm wide.
Leaf-formula ii-x/9-22(-25); interpinnal spicules present.
Capitula globose or rarely (M. tobatiensis) ellipsoid 3-6.5(-7.5) mm diam.; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx 0.2-0.5(-0.6) mm, the minutely denticulate or subtmncate rim either naked or minutely setuloseor glandularciUolate; corolla 1.8-2.9(-3) mm; filaments united at most 0.5 mm, often free almost to base.
Pods stipitate or subsessile, the body linear, 2.5- 5 (in M. corynadenia 8.5-11) mm wide, the slender replum 0.2-0.5 (in M. corynadenia nearly 1) mm wide, the valves disarticulating when ripe.
Spp. seven, five of extra-Hylaean Brazil and Paraguay, two of Amazonian Brazil n.-ward to Central America and s. Mexico.
Of the three Glandulosae known to Bentham two, M. orthocarpa and M. adenocarpa, were referred by him to ser. Asperatae close to what is here segregated as ser. Setosae, and the third, the still poorly known M. inamoena, was associated, doubtless on account of the pairs of aculei situated at insertion of pinnae, with the distantly related Caribbean Fagaracanthae.
The Glandulosae stand between ser. Setosae and ser. Paucifoliatae, with insignificant exceptions resembling the former in armature and glandular-setose indumentum and the latter in relatively simple leaf-formula, small capitula, and (disregarding M. corynadenia, in all other respects in accord with the group) in the narrow pod.
Conspectus of ser. Glandulosae Mimosa 137. adenocarpa Bentham 138. orthocarpa Bentham 139. corynadenia Britton & Rose 140. inamoena Bentham 14 L hypnodes Bameby 142. tobatiensis Bameby & Fortunato 143. aureliana Bameby & Fortunato Key to species of ser. Glandulosae 1.
Distributed from Brazilian Amazonia n. to tropical lowland Mexico.
2.
Pinnae 5-9-jug.; pod 4-5 mm wide; widespread in the range given 138.
M orthocarpa (p. 228).
2.
Pinnae 3-5-jug.; pod 8.5-11 mm wide; scattered from lower Amazonia to El Salvador 139.
Af. corynadenia (p. 229).
1.
Distributed over extra-Amazonian Brazil and Paraguay.
3.
Stems aculeate; lvs at least shortly petiolate, obviously so if pinnae less than 5-jug.; mostly Brazilian, but if Paraguayan the pinnae of larger lvs 6-9-jug. and capitula ellipsoid.
4.
Capitula globose; planaltine Brazil.
5.
Longer lfts 2.5-5.5 x 0.4-1.5 mm.
6.
Lf-stks unarmed or randomly aculeolate only on interpinnal segments of If-stk; lfts finely ciliolate or glandular-fimbriolate; corolla-lobes at least thinly glandular-setulose dorsally; Bahia, Minas Gerais, Goias, Mato Grosso do Sul 137.
M adenocarpa (p. 228).
6.
Lf-stks armed by a pair of aculei inserted next to each pair of pinna-pulvini; lfts glabrous; corolla-lobes glabrous; local in w.-centr. Goias 140.
M inamoena (p. 230).
5.
Longer lfts 8-13 x 1.8-3.3 mm; centr. Goias 141.
M. hypnodes (p. 231).
4.
Capitula ellipsoid, ± twice as long as diam.; Paraguay 142.
M. tobatiensis (p. 232).
3.
Stems unarmed; lvs subsessile, and pinnae 2-4-jug.; Paraguay 143.
M. aureliana (p. 233).
137.
Mimosa adenocarpa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 399.
1842.-"BrazU, Pohl, Sello, Claussen, Langsdorfli^'—Lectotypus,Pohl 731 = d.l417, collected in XI-XII. 1818 near Paracatu in w. Minas Gerais, K! isotypi, NY! W!; syntypi, Sello s.n.,
+B = F Neg. 1293\ G! K! P! W! Claussen 114, K! = NY Neg. 1846 = Claussen 848, BM! GH! N Y ! - M adenocarpa var. genuina fma aculeata Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9:7.1910, nom. superff.
Weak, diffusely ascending viscid and prickly shrubs and subshrubs to 2-3 m, except for glabrous faces of lfts ± densely charged throughout with slender capitate-glandular setulae to 0.4-1.4 mm mixed or not with minute gray villi, the stems and commonly some lf-stks armed with erect or more often sub-recurved, vertically dilated stramineous aculei to 2.5-4 mm, the many small capitula either largely axillary or forming an exserted, hysteranthously foliate pseudoraceme terminal to homotinous branches.
Stipules narrowly lanceolate or subsetiform (2-)2.5-4.5 X 0.3-0.7 mm, strongly 1-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of major cauline lvs (3-)4.5- 11 cm, the petiole 5-13 x 0.3-0.7 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-12 mm, the obscure or narrow ventral groove intermpted between pinna-pairs by a spicule 0.4-1.3 mm; pinnae of larger lvs 5-9-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 10-20 mm, their longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 13-22-jug., the first pair 0.5-1.1 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia, the thin-textured blades in outline linear-oblong obtuse, the longer ones 2.5-4.8 X 0.4-0.8 mm, their margin either thinly or remotely villosulous or glandular-fimbriolate, the ventral face nerveless, the slender centric midrib faintly raised beneath.
Peduncles solitary or 2-3 per node, 1-3 cm, at anthesis very slender, a little thickened in fmit; capitula relatively fewffd, without filaments 4-7.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform and usually a little longer than diam.; bracts subhyaline oblanceolate 0.5-1 x 0.2-0.45 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, all bisexual or some lower ones often staminate; calyx hyaline campanulate 0.2-0.5 mm, glabrous extemally, the subtmncate rim naked or with a few minute hairs or gland-tipped setulae to 0.25 mm; corolla vase-shaped 2.4-3 mm, the tube glabrous extemally, the ovate purplish lobes ±0.7-0.9 mm, dorsally with scattered or moderately crowded gland-tipped setulae; filaments pink, free to within 0.3 mm of base, the longer ones exserted 5-6 mm.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 8X) usually several per capitulum, stipitate, the stipe 1-2 mm, the undulately linear body in profile 13-24 X 2.4-3 mm, contracted at apex into a subulate beaklike cusp 1.5-3 mm, the replum 0.2-0.4 mm wide, shallowly constricted between (2-)3-7 seeds, the papery greenish-stramineous valves buUately elevated over each seed, like the unarmed or at times randomly aculeolate replum viscid-hispidulous overall with slender capitateglandular setulae often mixed with fine villi, when ripe breaking up into elliptic articles a little longer than wide; seeds basipetally descending, plumply ellipsoid 2-2.4 x 1.4-1.7 mm, the brown testa dull, girdled by a fuscous line.
On rocky creek banks and in open campo on red sandy soils, becoming weedy in disturbed cerrado and on roadsides, 700-1200 m, apparently local in centr. Bahia (Andarai; Lengois), centr. and s.-e. Goias (with Distrito Federal) and closely adj. Minas Gerais, and (formerly) in centr. Minas Gerais (Belo Horizonte; Lagoa Santa); disjunct in the Pantanal of Mato Grosso do Sul.— ¥1.
XII-V. Map 23.
138.
Mimosa orthocarpa Spruce ex Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 437.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 380, descr. ampliat.
1876.—"Habitat prope Santarem provinciae Paraensis: Riedel; ad lacum Quiriquiry ejusdem provinciae: Sello [properly Spruce] n. 518."-Lectotypus,5'/7rwc^575, K(hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 7597; isotypi.
Spruce s. n., +B = F Neg. 1350\ K (hb. Hook.)! LE! W!; syntypi, Riedel 37.
A! K (7560)! LE! M. calderonii Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23: 167.
1928.-"Type from El Angel, El Salvador, October, 1923, S. Calderon 1842.''-Holotypus, US!; clastotypus, NY! —Equated with M. orthocarpa by Grether, 1987: 318.
M. ^/<2«<^M/(95fl Bongard ex Bentham, 1875, 1876, 11.cc, nom. nud. [Riedel 37 in hb. Benth.
!].
In all respects like M. adenocarpa except sometimes precociously Fertile and appearing monoMAP 23.
Central and tropical South America.
Ranges of M. adenocarpa Bentham, M. inamoena Bentham, and M. orthocarpa Bentham. carpic, but the pod broader and usually longstipitate: stipe 2-6 mm, body 16-32 x 4-5 mm, the beak 1-3 mm, the articles 2.5-4 mm long. On lake shores and river banks subject to flooding, at margin of varzea forest, in seasonally moist savanna, and on granite outcrops, mostly below 300 m, scattered along rios Negro and Amazonas in Roraima, Amazonas and Para, Brazil, thence s.-e. to the Parnaiba valley near 7°30'S on the Maranhao-Piaui border and n. in scattered stations through the Orinoco basin in e. Colombia (Guainia) and Venezuela to n. Colombia (Boyaca, Meta), n. Venezuela (Carabobo), and Trinidad: disjunct in El Salvador and s. Mexico (Guerrero to Tabasco and s. to Chiapas).— FI. indefinitely through the year. —Arestin (Ven.).
Map 23.
139.
Mimosa corynadenia Britton & Rose, N. Amer. H. 23(3): 167.
1928.-"Near Ahuachapan, El Salvador, January [9-27], 1922 [fr].
Standley 19834."—Holotypus, NY!; isotypi, GH! US! Scrambling or procumbent shrub or subshrub of unknown potential stature, with terete lustrous virgate branches, armed on intemodes and on interpinnal segments of lf-stks with stout, gently recurved aculei ±1.5-3.5 mm, the stems, If-axes and peduncles in addition hispid with scattered plain and more numerous very slender glandtipped setae to 0.7-1.5 mm, the olivaceous concolorous lfts glabrous or remotely ciliolate, the small globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary and less often geminate in a long succession of If-axils on peduncle a little shorter than subtending If, some rarely, but only in praefloration, pseudoracemose.
Stipules erect subherbaceous triangular or lanceolate 1.5-4 x 1-1.3 mm, remotely setulose-ciliolate, otherwise glabrous, persistent.
Leaf-stalks slender 2.5-8 cm, the petiole of lower Ivs to 17 x 0.7 mm, of some upper lvs only 1-5 mm, the interpinnal segments 7-15 mm, the shallow ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs and charged between the first or all pairs with a spicule to 1-1.3 mm; pinnae 3-5- jug., accrescent distally, the first pair sometimes represented by a subulate bract, the rachis of furthest pair 14-35 mm, the longer interfoUolar segments 1.3-2.4 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 10- 17-jug., a little decrescent near each end of rachis, the first pair 0.5-0.8 mm distant from paraphyUidia scarcely 0.1 mm, the blades oblong from obtusangulate base, obtuse mucronulate, the larger ones 5-8.5 x 1.3-2 mm, 3.8-4.6 times as long as wide, all faintly l(-2)-nerved dorsally, the centric midrib discolored but scarcely raised, the posterior nerve obscure.
Peduncles (1.5-)2- 5.5 cm; capitula (few seen) without filaments ±5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-oblanceolate ±1-1.3 x 0.3 mm glabrous; flowers 4-5-merous diplostemonous glabrous; calyx 0.2-0.3 mm, obscurely denticulate; corolla turbinate ±2.5-2.8 mm, the membranous ovate shallowly concave 1-nerved lobes 0.7-1.1 x 0.8 mm; filaments ("white" in Brazil, "pink" in Venezuela) free almost to base, exserted 5.5-6 mm.
Pods 1-5 per capitulum, broadly linear straight ±30-45 X 8.5-11 mm, 6-8-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 1.5-3 mm and at apex into a cusp 1-2 mm, the replum at widest point ± 1 mm wide, the replum and valves alike hispid with stiff" erect straight tapering plain setae 2-7 mm mixed with shorter gland-tipped ones, the thinly papery, lustrous brown or stramineous valves buUately elevated over each seed, when ripe breaking up into transversely oblong freefalling, individually dehiscent articles 4-5.5 mm long; seeds (few seen) horizontal to long axis of pod, plumply obovoid or oblong-ellipsoid 4.5- 5 X 2.5-2.8 mm, the testa black or castaneous, moderately lustrous.
In wet ground, of unknown dispersal, collected once in fmit in January at 800-1000 m in El Salvador, several times in flower and fmit in October and December on lowland savanna in Apure and Guarico, Venezuela, once in igapo near 35 m on Ilha do Marapata near Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil, there in fmit with late flowers in March, and once on the grounds of the Faculty of Agronomy at Trinidad, depto. Beni, Bolivia, in fmit in April; probably a weed in some of these localities.
Mimosa corynadenia resembles in many respects M. adenocarpa and M. orthocarpa, but differs from both in the broad pod (8.5-11, not 2.5-5 mm wide).
From south Brazilian M. inamoena, of which the pod is not known, it differs in fewer (3-5, not 6-10) pairs of pinnae in larger leaves, in stout and longer peduncles (20-55, not 6-11 mm), and in capitula twice as large.
The range of M. corynadenia as presently known is inexplicable in phytogeographic terms.
140.
Mimosa inamoena Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 424.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 364, descr. ampliat.
1876.-".
.
. in arvis subuliginosis ad Salinas [in rio Araguaia valley near 13°40'S, 50°30'W] provinciae Goyaz: WeddeU."-Holotypus, WeddeU2086, collected in VI. 1844 (ff), K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 11664; isotypus, P! Slender erect prickly shrubs ± 1 m, the terete purplish-brown, distally paniculate-branched stems armed with many straight or subdecurved yellowish aculei 1-3 mm and thinly viscid-villosulous with mixed erect gland-tipped setulae to ±0.8 mm and minute incurved villi, the lfstks also armed laterally, at insertion of pinnae, and dorsally, between pinna-pairs, with similar but smaller aculei, the sparse concolorous foliage otherwise glabrous, the minute globose capitula solitary and geminate on subefoliate branches, forming a well-exserted panicle of lax pseudoracemes.
Stipules triangular-lanceolate 2-3 mm glabrous, persistent.
Leafstalks of lvs below infforescence to 8.5(-?) cm, ventrally 2-ribbed and narrowly sulcate, the sulcus interrupted between pinna-pairs by a spicule ±0.5 mm, the petiole and interpinnal segments ±8-12 mm; pinnae 6- 9(-10)-jug., of upper bracteal lvs fewer (no further described), strongly accrescent distally, the rachis of distal pair 2-3 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1.5-2 mm, carinate ventrally, sulcate laterally; lfts of proximal pinnae ±4-6-, of distal pinnae to 17-jug., little graduated, the first pair ±0.5 mm distant from minute subulate paraphyllidia, all in outline narrowly oblong from semicordate base, at apex obtuse apiculate, the larger ones ±4.5-5.5 x 1.2-1.5 mm, aU veinless above, faintly costate beneath, the midrib subcentric.
Peduncles capillary 6-11 mm, thinly glandular-setulose; capitula without filaments 3- 3.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts membranous, linear-spatulate 0.6-0.8 mm, glabrous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, glabrous, some lower ones staminate; calyx membranous campanulate 0.2 mm, the rim obscurely lobulate; corolla turbinate ±1.8 mm, the membranous, shallowly concave ovate-apiculate 1 -nerved lobes ±0.8 X 0.6 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted ±2.5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous; pod unknown.
In moist campo near 300 m, known only from the type, collected on lower rio Crixas at 13°40'S in w.-centr. Goias, Brazil.—Fl.
VI-VII(-?).
Map 23.
Speculation about the real affinity of M. inamoena is hampered by lack of the pod.
The species was associated by Bentham with M. bimucronata and the AntiUean Fagaracanthae that, perhaps only by coincidence, have pairs of aculei inserted behind most pairs of pinnae; but the plant does not closely resemble any of these in gross habit or indumentum.
In leaf-formula, in venation of leaffets and in proportions of the ffower it seems more similar to the also glandular M. adenocarpa, although certainly specifically distinct in the glabrous leaflets and corollas, in the smaller capitula (3-3.5, not 4-7.5 mm diam.) and filaments exserted only about 2.5 (not 5-6) mm from the corolla.
Paraguayan M. tobatiensis, with nearly the same leaf-formula, has unarmed leaf-stalks, much longer peduncles, and flowers a third larger arranged in ellipsoid capitula.
141.
Mimosa hypnodes Bameby, sp. nov., a M. adenotricha, quoad habitum, pubem ac legumen angustum brevistipitatum comparanda, imprimis foliolis magnis 8-13 (nec 2.5-5) mm usque longis simulac textura ac venatione iis M. somniantis praesimilibus diversa, ab ipsius M. somniantis formis aculeatis corolla membranacea (haud multistriata) ulterius divergens.
Ab arete affini necnon sympatrica M. somnambulante, quoad foliola nisi minus numerosa 9-19-(nec 18-34-)juga usque manifeste consanguinea, caulibus petiolisque dissite aculeatis coroUaeque lobulis 1 - vel indistincte tantum 3-nerviis primo intuitu differt.—Brazil.
Goias: 8 km by road w. of Monte Alegre de Goias, 600-700 m, 11.
III. 1973 (fl, fr), W. R. Anderson (with Kalin Arroyo, Hill, Reis dos Santos & Souza) 65iP.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, NY, R, US. Weak shrubs or subshrubs 6-15 dm, the stems and axes of lvs and inflorescence variably pilose with erect rufous plain setae to 1-2.5 mm and viscid-setulose with fuscous gland-tipped trichomes to 0.3-1.3 mm often mixed with minute whitish villi, some intemodes often and some lfstks occasionally armed with scattered erect or subdecurved vulnerant aculei to 1.5-3.5 mm, the pallidly glaucescent foliage glabrous except for random cilia on some lfts proximal to pulvinus, the pseudoracemose inflorescence of small, rather loosely few-fld capitula exserted from foliage only at early anthesis, leafy in fmit.
Stipules lanceolate or narrowly lance-setiform (3-)4-8 X 0.5- 1 mm, plane or subinvolute, firm but not coriaceous, dorsally pubescent like stem, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks of major cauline lvs 3-13 cm, the petiole including little-dilated pulvinus 1.5-3.5 cm, at middle 0.5-1.2 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 10-25 mm, the ventral groove intermpted between pinna-pairs by an acicular spicule 0.6-1.5 mm; pinnae (2-)3-6- jug., moderately accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 2-5.5(-6) cm, their longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (8-)9-l9-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 1-1.5 mm distant from subulate purplish paraphyllidia, all in outline oblong obtuse, the larger ones to 8-13 x 1.8-3.3 mm, the blades nerveless above, prominulously 3-nerved beneath, the midrib giving rise on each side upward from near middle to 4-5 secondary venules.
Peduncles 1-3 per node, (1-) 1.5-4 cm; capitula without filaments 4-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis either conelike or moriform; bracts narrowly (ob)lanceolate 1-3.5 mm, dorsally either viscid-villosulous or subglabrous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lowest staminate, the upper bisexual and a little larger; calyx 0.35-0.4 mm glabrous, or the rim with a few chaffy cilia to 0.2-0.4 mm; corolla 2.6-3 mm, the turbinatecampanulate tube glabrous, the ovate lobes ± 1 mm, faintly penniveined, dorsally either glabrous or thinly pilosulous.
Pods (Anderson 6839, NY) 1-4 per capitulum, in profile 30-40 x 3 - 3.5 mm, cuneately narrowed at base into a stipe less than 1 mm, acuminately attenuate beyond the furthest seed into an erect beak, the replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, undulately depressed between the 5-8 seeds, the papery valves buUately elevated over each seed, breaking up when ripe into free-falling articles 3 ^ mm long and as or a little less wide, the pericarp and replum alike hispid and viscidulous with weak erect plain setae to 1-2 mm and shorter gland-tipped setulae mixed with fine villi; seeds (few seen) plumply rhomboid-ovoid ±2.8 X 2.5 mm, the testa lustrous castaneous.
On rocky hillsides in cerrado, 600-700 m, apparently uncommon, known only from e. affluents of upper rio Tocantins (forks of rios Manoel Alves and Parana) between 11°30' and 13°30'S in centr. Goias, BrazU.—Fl.
II-IV(-?).
Between March 11 and 13, 1973 Dr. W. Anderson and companions collected within a few kilometers of Monte de Alegre de Goias five mimosas referable to one or other of Bentham's series Asperatae and Somniantes (all NY): no. 6833, typical prickly M. (Asperatae) adenocarpa, with tiny, indistinctly costate leaffets, 1-nerved corolla-lobes and short-stipitate pods; no. 6812, typical unarmed M. (Somniantes) somnians var. leptocaulis, with equally small but dorsally venulose, subglaucescent leaffets, pluristriate corolla-lobes and long-stipitate pods; no. 6892, type of M. somnambulans, resembling the last except for much larger leaffets (fmit unknown); and nos.
6839, 6907, here named M. hypnodes, in which the venulose leaffets of M. somnambulans coincide with aculeate stems, delicately 4-nerved corollas and the short-stipitate pods of M. adenocarpa.
The two collections of M. hypnodes have the same foliage but differ in details of infforescence, no. 6839 having the short bracts, glabrous corollas and pods exactly of M. adenocarpa, and no. 6907 longer bracts and pilosulous ffowers foreign to all the rest but suggestive of widespread M. paludosa, probably present in the same region.
The odd assortment of ffowers, bracts and pods encountered in these collections are of a sort that might have arisen from hybrids between M. somnians and M. paludosa, but there is this difficulty: the large, dorsally venulose leaflets common to M. somnambulans and M. hypnodes, which differ from one another so greatly in venulation of the petals, occur in none of the three widespread species which could be supposed to furnish the other variable features.
I am consequently obliged, though with reluctance, to describe M. somnambulans and M. hypnodes in the rank of species.
If a distinction between striate-nervulose and membranous corolla cannot be upheld as significant, the taxonomy of the Asperatae will founder.
Beside Anderson's two collections I have seen only one other of M hypnodes, a ffowerless plant collected on a tributary of rio Manoel Alves (rio Reason) by Pohl in July 1819, on his journey northward from Sao FeUx to Porto Real (K, NY, W).
This collection was tentatively referred by Bentham to a variety of M. elliptica.
142.
Mimosa tobatiensis Bameby & Fortunato, Brittonia 39: 171, fig. 4.
1987.-"Paraguay.
Depto.
Cordillera: Tobati, s.d. anno 1914 (fl, frjuri), R. Chodat 274.
.
.
.
Depto.
Central:. .. entre Bemalcue y Emboscada in regione lacus Ypacaray, Feb 1913 (fl), Hassler 12501. .. . "
- Holotypus, Chodat 274, G! = NY Neg. 11831; paratypi, Hassler 12501, A! G! GH! MO! NY! Erect, densely leafy microphyllidious shrubs perhaps 1 m or more, except for glabrous faces of lfts viscid-hispidulous throughout with crowded erect gland-tipped setulae 0.2-0.3 mm and randomly armed with few straight erect stramineous intemodal aculei to 0.5-4 mm, the thintextured lfts olivaceous concolorous, the eUipsoid capitula shortly pseudoracemose in praefloration, early equalled or surpassed by lvs, the fmits immersed in foliage.
Stipules submembranous lanceolate 1.5-3 X 0.4-0.8 mm, 1-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 4-8 cm, the petiole 6-12 X 0.5-1 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-9(-10) mm, the ventral groove intermpted between each pair of pinnae by a proximally pubemlent spicule 1-2 mm; pinnae 6-9- jug., conspicuously accrescent upward, the rachis of distal pair (12-) 15-30 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.3 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 18-25-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.6-1.8 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.5 mm, the blades Unear-oblong from obtusangulate base, obtuse at apex, those near mid-rachis 3-5.3 x 0.7-1.3 mm, ±4-4.5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath finely 3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric, simple or weakly 1 -branched on each side near apex, one anterior and one posterior primary nerve brochidodrome far beyond mid-blade, the plane margin glandular-fimbriolate.
Peduncles solitary or geminate 1.5-3.5 cm; c<2/7/^w/fl ellipsoid, without filaments 8-10 x ±4.5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse flbuds thinly stipitate-glandular at tip; bracts membranous linear-spatulate 0.6-0.9 x 0.2-0.3 mm, glandular-fimbriolate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, all but a few lowermost bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.45-0.6 mm, the shortly denticulate rim glandular-fimbriolate; corolla turbinate 2.3-2.9 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave 1-nerved lobes 1-1.3 x 0.8-0.9 mm, thinly glandular-setulose distally; filaments pink, united at very base into a stemonozone 0.2-0.3 mm, exserted ±4.5 mm.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) 5-12 per capitulum ascending in dense clusters, in profile undulately linear from attenuate substipitate base, to 40 x 4 mm, 8-12-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum ±0.4 mm wide, the papery valves buUately elevated over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely viscid-hispidulous overall with crowded erect gland-tipped setae, those of replum short, those of valves attaining 0.8-1.4 mm, the presumably free-falling articles 3.5-4 mm long; seeds unknown.
In habitats not reported, to be looked for in campo thickets near 200 m, apparently very local in deptos.
Central and adj. Cordillera near 25°S in w.-centr. Paraguay (Lago Ypacarai; Tobati).— Fl.
I-?.
The two known collections of this ambiguous mimosa were found misidentified, one as M. uliginosa, the other as M. paraguariae affin.,
but their leaves differ from those of all members of ser. Stipellares in narrow subulate paraphyllidia and conspicuous spicules between each pair of pinnae.
The venulation of the leaflets is like that of M. paraguariae but fainter, whereas the ellipsoid capitula recall M. uliginosa.
Despite these evocative resemblances I believe the tme affinity of M. tobatiensis is with remotely allopatric M. orthocarpa, from which it differs in leaffet-venation and in the viscid-hispidulous indumentum of the stems: in M. tobatiensis consisting of short stout setulae of nearly equal length, in M. orthocarpa of extremely slender-shafted setae of different lengths intermingled.
Similar also in growth-habit and leaf-spicules is M. aureliana of the Brazil-Paraguay border country, but this is unarmed, has only 2-4 (not 6-9) pairs of pinnae in larger leaves, and globose (not ellipsoid capitula).
Leaf-stalks characteristically armed at insertion of pinnae by a pair of aculei, leaffet-venation, and tiny globose capitula bome on peduncles about 1 (not 1.5-3.5) cm long effectively separate the also distantly allopatric planaltine M. inamoena.
143.
Mimosa aureliana Bameby & Fortunato, Brittonia 39: 165, fig. 1.
1987.-"Paraguay.
Depto.
Amambay: Camino entre mta 5 y Bella Vista, 13 km N de mta 5,15 May 1974 (fl, fr), Aurelio Schinini 8976.
.
.
."
— Holotypus, CTES; isotypi, G 1012821 = NY Neg. 11827, G 1022271 Unarmed microphyllidious shrubs ±2 m with terete branches repeatedly forking distally, viscid-villosulous nearly throughout with erect or incurved plain hairs and gland-tipped setulae to 0.2-0.25 mm, the many small subsessile lvs concolorous, the lfts thinly pubemlent beneath, glabrous above, glandular-ciliolate, the small globose capitula mostly from axil of coevally expanding lvs, some at tip of secondary branchlets shortly pseudoracemose in praefloration.
Stipules ascending, thinly herbaceous lance-elliptic 1-1.8 mm, 1-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 1-3 cm, the tme petiole reduced or almost so to slender livid pulvinus, at most 1 mm longer, the longest of the slender interpinnal segments 6-14 mm, the narrow ventral groove bridged between each pinna-pair and there charged with an ascending stramineous spicule 0.4-0.9 mm; pinnae 2-4-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 12-20 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.8-1.2 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 11-18-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.7-1.3 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.6 mm, the blades Unear-oblong from auriculate base, obtuse at apex, those near mid-rachis 2.3—4.2 x 0.6-0.9 mm, all nerveless above, beneath weakly 2(-3)- nerved from pulvinule, the straight simple midrib only slightly displaced from center, the posterior nerve(s) weak, short or almost imperceptible.
Peduncles solitary and paired 6-14 mm; capitula without filaments 4 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the plumply obovoid fl-buds thinly viscid-villosulous; bracts spatulate-oblanceolate, 0.5-0.6 mm, minutely glandular-ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, all but a few at base of capitulum bisexual; calyx membranous shaUowly campanulate 0.3 mm, the minutely denticulate rim with few gland-tipped setulae; coroUa 1.9-2.1 mm, the turbinate tube glabrous, the ovate membranous 1 -nerved, shallowly convex lobes ±1 X 0.7 mm, thinly viscid-viUosulous dorsally; filaments lilac-pink, free to base, the longer set exserted ±3 mm.
Pods numerous in loose heads, in profile undulately linear, gradually contracted into a basipetally tapering stipe 3-5 mm and at apex into an erect cusp 3-4.5 mm, the seminiferous body 15-23 x 4 mm, 3 - 5-seeded, the replum ±0.4 mm wide, the papery valves buUately elevated over each seed, the replum and valves alike thinly pilosulous and viscid-setulose overall, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 2.5-4(-4.5) mm long; seeds unknown.
In campo cerrado near (?) 400 m, known only from the headwaters of rio Apa, near 22°30'S in depto. Amambay, Paraguay; to be expected in adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, BrazU.-R. IV-VI(-?).
This inconspicuous smaU-flowered mimosa has much in common with M. adenocarpa and M. inamoena, but differs obviously in abbreviated leaf-stalks, the elimination of a tme petiole, and the relatively few (2-4, not 5-10) pairs of pinnae.
Related species are prickly, aculeate on the stems and often also on the leaf-stalks, whereas M. aureliana is unarmed or nearly so.
B(xvii).
Series STIPELLARES Bentham Mimosa sect. Batocaulon DeCandolle ser. Stipellares Bentham.
M. sect. Ameria ser. Stipellares Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 406.
1842.—Sp. lectotypica: M. uraguensis Hooker & Amott.—M. sect. Habbasia ser. Stipellares Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 430.
1875.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Stipellares sensu Bentham, 1876: 365; Burkart, 1948: 37.
Microphyllidious, rarely arborescent shrubs and woody-based herbs 3-30(-40) dm, variable in habit, either unarmed or armed on intemodes and occasionaUy on lf-stks with straight, recurved, gently acroscopic (but not with serial cat'sclaw) aculei, these often one each on the intrapetiolar and infrastipular ribs of an intemode.
Pubescence potentially composed of fine, either incurved or straight hairs and either gland-tipped set(ul)ae or sessile glands, these sometimes reduced to resinous spots, but the glandular element sometimes suppressed, and the whole plant exceptionaUy glabrous, plain setae always 0.
Stipules mostly deltate, ovate or triangular-lanceolate, sometimes reffexed or revolute, l-3(-5)- nerved, persistent.
Leaf-formula (i-)ii-x(-xii)/3- 20(-22, in forms of M bifurca -40); interpinnal spicules 0; lfts either opposite or alternate along pinna-rachis, the largest (1-)1.5-9(-l 1) mm; paraphyllidia eUiptic, ovate or suborbicular-reniform, often resembling diminutive lfts.
Inflorescence of mostly axillary peduncles, sometimes pseudoracemose in praefloration; capitula of most spp. either globose or ellipsoid, prior to anthesis 4-7 mm, in few spp. to 10-11 mm diam., the units of inflorescence in one sp. spicate; flowers sessile, normally 4-merous 8-androus (the stamens in M. iperoensis 4-8), either all bisexual or some lower ones staminate; calyx campanulate 0.25-1 (-1.4) mm, the tmncate or shortly denticulate rim sometimes asymmetric; bisexual corollas 1.9-3.4 (in Mm. paraguariae and strobiliflora attaining 3.5-4) mm; filaments either free or monadelphous below the ovary.
Pods (unknown in Mm. bracteolaris, implexa, kermesina and strobiliflora) either stipitate or subsessile, in profile linear or linear-oblong 3-6 mm wide, (1-)2-8(-10)-seeded, the replum 0.3-0.7 (in M. sanguinolenta -1.2) mm diam., the valves either disarticulating or separating entire from replum.
Spp. 19, several poorly known from incomplete or scanty material, highly diversified in campo habitats in extratropical Brazil, s.-e. Paraguay, n.-centr. and n.-e. Argentina, and Umguay, extending n. across the Tropic line only in S. Paulo, Brazil and depto. Amambay, Paraguay, one sp. (M. lepidota) isolated at 18°-19°S on the e. slope of the Bolivian Andes.
The series Stipellares is distinguished from others in sect. Batocaulon primarily by dilated paraphyllidia (stipels of Bentham) that simulate minute leaflets, a feature shared within Batocaulon only by monotypic ser. Auriculatae (which see for discussion).
It differs further from ser. Pachycarpae by lack of plain setae, prevailingly lower leaf-formulae, smaller capitula, and especially by slender pods with narrower replum; further from ser. Paucifoliatae by prevalent (though not ubiquitous) glandular indumentum and lack of interpinnal spicules; but further from ser. Glandulosae by espiculate leaf-stalks alone.
The sometimes deceptively similar Cordistipulae are neatly distinguished by trimerous ffowers and, except for widely dispersed M. guaranitica, by allopatric dispersal.
Bentham based ser. Stipellares on seven species, all collected in flower by Sello at unrecorded places in extratropical Brazil (or Umguay), two of them in addition by Tweedie and Baird in the Banda Oriental.
The fmits of only two of them were then known to Bentham, and these by chance were of the valvately dehiscent type that has since proved only exceptional in the group.
Following this misconception, the series was subordinated to sect. Ameria Bentham, next following the ser. Pachycarpae.
As sect. Ameria later tumed out to be an artificial concept, Bentham removed the series to sect. Habbasia.
Even with additions in recent years the series has maintained its integrity, which is expressed as much in general facies and a coherent dispersal as by the one critically diagnostic feature of dilated paraphyllidia.
As presently defined, ser. Stipellares consists of two circles of affinity, one marked by leaffets conventionally opposite along the rachis, the other with leaflets alternate, but united by M. uraguensis, which may have leaflets opposite or alternate on one plant.
Aculei are found in both subgroups of Stipellares but are universal in neither.
When present the aculei are mostly internodal, straight or only a little curved, never of the cat's-claw type.
The subgroup with opposite leaflets may be glandular-setose or not, but glands when present are at least shortly stalked and often raised on a setular shaft many times as long as their diameter.
Alternate leaflets are associated with sessile or impressed glands, often reduced to resinous spots.
Two members of the first subgroup have ellipsoid rather than globose capitula and in habit recall ser. Glandulosae except for telltale paraphyllidia and lack of interpinnal spicules.
The recently discovered M. barnebiana differs from the rest in loosely spicate (subracemose) flowers and combines the glandular indumentum and broad (though minute) paraphyllidia of ser. Stipellares with the superficial aspect of some Leiocarpae.
Conspectus of ser. Stipellares Mimosa * Lfts opposite along pinna-rachis; capitula ellipsoid.
144.
M%/«c>5<2 Chodat & Hassler 145. glanduliseta Burkart ** Lfts opposite along pinna-rachis; capitula globose.
146. paraguariae yi.
Micheli a. var. paraguariae b. var. chacoensis Hassler c. var. multiglandulosa (Hassler) Bameby d. var. tomentosa (Hassler) Bameby 147. cordobensis Ariza 148. iperoensis Hoehne a. var. paradenia Bameby b. var. iperoensis 149. kermesina Otto 8L T>ietrich 150. cruenta Bentham 151. pseudotrachycarpa Bameby 152. sanguinolenta Bameby 153. hatschbachii Bameby 154. uraguensis Hooker & Amott 155. bracteolaris Bentham 156. /m/7/^Jca Bentham *** Lfts alternate along pinna-rachis; capitula globose.
157. bifurca Bentham a. var. bifurca b. var. reducta (Hassler) Bameby c. var. hassleriana (Chodat) Bameby d. var. desmanthoides (Hoehne) Bameby 158. lepidota Herzog 159. glycyrrhizoides Bameby 160. intricata Bentham 161. strobiliflora Burkart **** Lfts alternate along pinna-rachis; fls spicate.
162. barnebiana Fortunato & Tressens Key to species of ser. Stipellares 1.
Pinnae of aU lvs exactly 1-jug; small humifuse subshmbs 156.
M. implexa (p. 249).
1.
Pinnae of larger lvs 2-several pairs; habit various.
2.
Lfts inserted along pinna-rachis in opposite pairs or, if some alternate then eglandular.
3.
Either the stems aculeate, or the stems and lvs (at least when young) glandular, often both at once.
4.
Capitula prior to anthesis ellipsoid, 1.5-2 times as long as wide.
5.
Aculei of stem widely ascending; lfts of longer pinnae 18-34-jug.; lvs subtending peduncles mostly hysteranthous, the young inflorescence pseudoracemosely exserted from foliage; Paraguay, n.-e. Argentina, and adjacent Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil 144.
Af. uliginosa (p. 237).
5.
Aculei of stem subrecurved; lfts of longer pinnae 8-15-jug.; lvs subtending capitula mostly synanthous, the inflorescence early leafy-bracteate; local within range of the last, in s. Paraguay and adjacent Argentina (Misiones) 145.
M. glanduliseta (p. 238).
4.
Capitula prior to anthesis globose or almost so.
6.
Largest lfts of a plant 2-9.5 mm; filaments not or only obscurely monadelphous.
7.
Stems armed and lfts at once glabrous and eglandular, all or many of them inserted alternately along pinna-rachis; strictly riparian along rio Uruguay in Argentina (Corrientes, Entre Rios), adjacent Umguay, and presumably adjacent Brazil (Rio Grande do Sul); lf-formula i-iii/8-13; valves of pod usually separating entire from replum.
.
154.
M. uraguensis (p. 247).
7.
Stems either unarmed or, if armed, the lfts at once opposite along pinna-rachis and gland-fimbriolate or ciliolate; in campo habitats, sometimes wet but not riparian.
8.
Either the pinnae of larger lvs more than 4-jug., or their lfts more than 13-jug., or both at once.
9.
Stems randomly armed; central Cordoba, Argentina 147.
M. cordobensis (p. 241).
9.
Stems unarmed; Paraguay, Argentina e. of rio Parana, and s.-e. Brazil.
10.
Capitula without filaments 6.5-12 mm diam.; primary nerves of hypophyllum on either side of midrib produced nearly to blade apex without anastomosis; Paraguay, Brazil (w. Parana to w. Rio Grande do Sul), and n.-e. Argentina (Misiones to Entre Rios) 146.
M. paraguariae (p. 238).
10.
Capitula without filaments 4.5-6 mm diam.; primary nerves on either side of midrib anastomosing with secondary venules arising from midrib, thereby enclosing sunken areolae; e. Paraguay and s.-e. Brazil (s.-e. S. Paulo and Parana) 148.
M. iperoensis (p. 241).
8.
Lf-formula ii-iv(-v)/(5-)7-l3.
11.
Stipules of primary lvs spreading-recurved, their margins at least incipiently, often strongly revolute; lfts superficially nerveless or almost so 151.
M. pseudotrachycarpa (p. 245).
11.
Stipules all erect and plane; lfts coarsely bluntly 2-4-nerved dorsally.
12.
Stems unarmed 149.
M. kermesina (p. 243).
12.
Stems armed on intemodes with subhorizontal aculei to 3-6 mm 150.
M. cruenta (p. 243).
6.
Largest lfts 1-2 mm; filaments monadelphous through (0.3-)0.4-l .5 mm; local in s.-centr. Parana, Brazil; armed procumbent shmblets 2-5 dm 153.
M. hatschbachii (p. 247).
3.
Unarmed, and both stems and foliage eglandular, commonly villosulous overall (but exceptionally glabrate throughout); extratropical Brazil s.-ward from Parana, Umguay, and adjacent Argentina.
13.
Capitula prior to anthesis moriform, the interfloral bracts not over 2 mm; lf-formula i-iv/ 4-10; pod valvately dehiscent, the valves basipetally separating entire from replum; relatively widespread in the range given 152.
M sanguinolenta (p. 245).
13.
Capitula prior to anthesis hispid with linear-attenuate bracts ±4-5 mm projecting far beyond fl-buds; lf-formula ii/3-5; pod unknown; s. Rio Grande do Sul and Umguay 155.
M. bracteolaris (p. 248).
2.
Lfts of aU pinnae inserted alternately along pinna-rachis and charged dorsally with sessile lentiform or impressed glands, or resinously spotted.
14.
Fls capitate.
15.
Capitula prior to anthesis moriform, the interfloral bracts shorter than fl-buds.
16.
Longer lf-stks 20-70 mm and longer pinna-rachises 14-70(-90) mm.
17.
Distributed in campo habitats below 1200 m in Paraguay, n.-e. Argentina, and Brazil s.-ward from Parana into Umguay; calyx 0.5-1.1 mm;filamentspink-purple; lvs of relatively broad outline, the If-stk 20-70 mm and the longer pinna-rachises 20-90 mm.
18.
Plants unarmed; pods (not well known) smooth, either glutinous or minutely glandular but esetose; range as just given 157.
M bifurca (p. 249).
18.
Plants armed with straight intemodal aculei; pod densely hispid overall with erect, plain and gland-tipped setae 1-4 mm; local in s.-centr. Parana 159.
M. glycyrrhizoides (p. 252).
17.
Distributed in submontane woodland at 1800-2350 m on e. slope of Bolivian Andes in deptos.
Sta. Cmz and Chuquisaca; calyx 1.2-1.4 mm; filaments white; lvs of relatively narrow outline, the longer lf-stks 2.5-5 cm, the longer pinnarachises 1.4-2.1 cm 158.
M lepidota (p. 251).
16.
Longer lf-stks 8-18 mm and longer pinna-rachises 5-8.5 mm; larger lfts 1-1.4 mm; s.- e. Brazil (Rio Grande do Sul) 160.
M. intricata (p. 253).
15.
Capitula prior to anthesis conelike, the 2-3 lowest bracts 2-3-lobed and ±4 mm long, forming an involucral cup, the oblanceolate interfloral bracts 3.5-5 mm, concealing the flbuds; local in upper Igua^u basin in s.-e. Parana 161.
M strobiliflora (p. 253).
14.
Fls spicate, the floral axis ±3-5 cm 162.
M. barnebiana (p. 254).
144.
Mimosa uliginosa Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 557 [=P1. hassler.
413].
1904.—"[Paraguay] .
.
. in uUginosis pr. flumen Carimbatay, Dec, [Hassler] n. 5816."
— Holotypus, G!; isotypi, K! NY! M. uliginosa sensu Burkart, 1948: 56, fig. 4.
Microphyllidious shrubs and treelets (1-)2-3 m with simply virgate or paniculately branching homotinous stems usually but not invariably armed on random intemodes and on either dorsal or lateral ribs of lf-stks with gently acroscopic stramineous aculei 0.5-3.5 mm, the stems and all If-axes viscid-villosulous with crowded erect pin-shaped gland-tipped setulae 0.2-0.8 mm mixed with incurved pubemlence, the concolorously olivaceous (when dry brownish), minutely pallid-dotted plane lfts usually glabrous on both faces, sometimes thinly glandular-pubemlent beneath, always setulose-ciliolate, the ellipsoid capitula single or 2-3(-4) together in axil of hysteranthous lvs, forming in early anthesis a pseudoraceme exserted up to 0.5-2 dm from foliage, but the peduncles soon surpassed by the subtending If, the fmits immersed.
Stipules erect or in age spreading, deltate-ovate or lanceolate 1-2.5(-3) X 0.6-1.4 mm, weakly 1-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of primary lvs 3-9 cm (of some small distal lvs, no further described, shorter), the petiole 8-19 x 0.5-0.9 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 6-13(-15) mm, the ventral sulcus subcontinuous between pinnae (spicules 0); pinnae (4-)5-8(-9)-jug., distally accrescent, the rachis of last pair 15-26(-35) mm. the interfoliolar segments 0.4-0.9 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 19-30(34)-jug., decrescent only at very ends of rachis, the small first pair 0.5-1.3 mm distant from ovate, often setula-tipped paraphyllidia 0.2-0.4 X 0.2-0.4 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from obtusely auriculate base, rounded or obscurely apiculate at apex, those near mid-rachis 2.5-4.5(-5.3) x 0.7-1.1(-1.2) mm, 3.5-4 times as long as wide, all faintly 1- 2-nerved dorsally, the straight, scarcely excentric midrib immersed, the posterior nerve very short or obsolescent.
Peduncles 13-30(-34) mm; capitula without filaments 6-10 x 4_5(_5.5) mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the densely packed fl-buds glabrous or minutely papillose-puberulent, eglandular; bracts linear or linear-spatulate 0.6-1.1 X 0.1-0.3 mm, minutely ciliolate, caducous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate and a little smaller; calyx membranous turbinate-campanulate glabrous 0.4-0.6 mm, the tmncate or minutely denticulate orifice occasionally with a few microscopic setulae; corolla 2-2.7(-2.8) mm, the membranous ovateapiculate, shallowly convex 1-nerved lobes 0.9- 1.2 X 0.65-0.9 mm; filaments pink, at base united with corolla into a stemonozone 0.3-0.5 mm, exserted 5.5-7.5 mm.
Pods usually 2-7 per capitulum, subsessile or basally sterile and pseudostipitate, in profile undulately Unear, when weU fertilized 25-50 x 3^.7 mm, 7-12-seeded, the constricted replum 0.4-0.5 mm diam., the papery brown valves coUiculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike (but the latter especially over seeds) densely villosulous with fine erect hairs ±0.2-0.3 mm mixed with pinhead setulae 0.1-0.2 mm, when ripe breaking up into freefalling, tardily dehiscent articles (3-)3.5-5 mm long; 5^^(5f5Compressed-obovate ±3.5 x 2.7 mm, the smooth sublustrous testa brown and fuscousmottled.
In low-lying campo and seasonally swampy thickets, common and widespread in centr. and s.-w. Misiones and n. Corrientes, Argentina, extending weakly n. in Paraguay to valley of rio Apa, and e. into w. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.- Fl.
IX-III, fr.
I-onward.
145.
Mimosa glanduliseta Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 58, fig. 5.
1948.-"Argentina.
Misiones: Bonpland .
.
.
E. L. Ekman 1630, 26.
XII.1907 "-Holotypus, S (not seen); isotypi, MO! NY!; paratypi, Fiebrig 5901, G! GH! Slender microphyllidious shrubs or subshrubs 5(-?) dm tall, viscid throughout with erect glandtipped setulae 0.1-0.4 mm tall and armed on subterete intemodes and along dorsal and lateral ribs of lf-stks with scattered slender, stramineous or brown, subrecurved aculei 0.5-1.5 mm, the sparse foliage olivaceous concolorous, the faces of lfts densely sprinkled with minute sessile or subsessile glands, the small ellipsoid capitula solitary or rarely geminate at random If-axils on a capillary peduncle about as long as subtending If.
Stipules ascending or subdeflexed, herbaceous ovate-triangular 1.5-3.5 x 0.5-1.2 mm, slenderly 3-6-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-6 (of flowering branchlets seldom over 3) cm, the petiole to ±5-7 X 0.25-0.4 mm and the interpinnal segments about as long, the narrow ventral sulcus intermpted between pinnae by a livid-glandular bridge but tme spicule 0, the terminal appendage lanceolate foliaceous; pinnae 4-6(-7)-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 10-23 mm, the interfoliolar segments ±0.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 8-13(-15)-jug., subequilong, the first pair 0.6-1.1 mm distant from ovate-suborbicular green paraphyllidia 0.3-0.5 mm, the blades oblong or Unear-oblong obtuse from obliquely obtusangulate base, the larger ones 1.8- 3.5 X 0.6-1.3 mm, ±2.5-3.5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath faintly l(-2)- nerved from pulvinule, the immersed midrib subcentric, the margin minutely gland-fimbriolate.
Peduncles 2.5-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments 8-11 X 5.5-6 mm, prior to anthesis moriform; bracts oblanceolate or linear-spatulate 0.7-1.3 X 0.2-0.4 mm, deciduous; y/ow^r^ 4-merous 8-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.3-0.4 mm, the rim entire or obscurely denticulate, either glabrous or fimbriolate with minute setulae 0.1-0.2 mm; corolla funnelform 1.9-2.4 mm, the ovate lobes 0.8-1 X 0.6 mm, a little thickened at very apex, densely minutely glandular-setulose externally; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 6.5- 8.5 mm.
Pods ±1-6 per capitulum, in profile undulately linear (2-)2.5-3.5(-4) cm x 3 ^ mm, 6-10(-12)-seeded, at base tapering into a stipe or pseudostipe ± 2 mm and at apex into a slender cusp 1-2.5 mm, the replum 0.4-0.5 mm diam., the valves buUately raised over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely minutely viscidsetulose overall and the valves in addition hispid with stronger pallid setae to 0.6-1.2 mm crowded toward middle of each article, the ripe valves fuscous-brown papery, breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 2.5-3 mm long; seeds obliquely basipetal, obtusely rhombic-lentiform ±2.5 x 2-2.2 mm, the fuscousbrown testa sublustrous.
In dry stony campo and at edge of thickets, below 250 m, known only from the lower Parana valley in s.-e. Paraguay (depto. Alto Parana, without precise locality) and adj. Misiones, Argentina (Sta. Ana; Bonpland).—Fl.
X-I(-?).
Mimosa glanduliseta appears fiiUy distinct from sympatric and nearly sympatric Stipellares in aculeate stems and ellipsoid capitula.
As noted by Burkart, this combination of characters recalls M. (ser. Glandulosae) adenocarpa, but the dilated paraphyllidia and lack of interpinnal spicules are decisive differences.
146.
Mimosa paraguariae M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 28(7): 59.
1883.-Typus infra sub var. paraguariae indicatur.
Unarmed, densely leafy, amply microphyllidious subshrubs and small shrubs (3-)4-l 2 dm with proximally defoliate slender tmnks erect and ascending from slenderly fusiform woody root or xylopodium, villosulous and viscid-hispidulous throughout with fine whitish hairs and erect glandtipped setae or setulae to 0.3-4 mm, the olivaceous foliage concolorous, the firm plane, dull or resinously sublustrous lfts thinly pubemlent on both faces, glandular-setulose-ciUate, the globose capitula either all axillary and immersed in foliage or initially forming a shortly exserted but usually hysteranthously foliate pseudoraceme terminal to primary stem or lateral branchlets.
Stipules either erect or recurved, subherbaceous ovate or lanceolate, acute or acuminate and mucronate 2-4(-4.5) X 1-2.5 mm, bluntly carinate dorsally or when broad subpinnately nerved, pubescent like stem, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-8(- 9.5) cm, the petiole including (or rarely reduced to) pulvinus (1-)2-17 mm, at middle 0.5-0.9 mm diam., the interpinnal segments (3-)4-12 mm, the ventral groove continuous between pinnapairs (spicules 0); pinnae of major lvs (3-)4- 8-jug. (of some distal lvs of some plants only 2-4-jug., not further described), decrescent proximally but distally subequilong, the axis of longer ones (1.5-)2-4.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.8-2(-2.4) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 15-27-, rarely 12-14-jug., the first pair 0.3-1.3 mm distant from suborbicular, ovate, or lanceolate, obtuse or apiculate paraphyllidia 0.3-1 mm, a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the blades oblong or oblong-eUiptic from oblique, shallowly cordate base, obtuse at apex, those at mid-rachis (3_)4_9(_9.5) X 1.3-2.4(-3) mm, 2.3-4.2 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath mostly 4-nerved from pulvinule, the centric midrib weakly 1 (-2)-branched distally or essentially simple, the one anterior and the inner posterior nerve submarginal and produced nearly to tip of 1ft, the outer posterior nerve weak and short.
Peduncles solitary and fasciculate by 2-3, (1.2-) 1.5-9 cm; capitula without filaments 6.5-10.5 (-12) mm diam.; bracts linear-oblanceolate or spatulate 2-4.5 x 0.25-0.45 mm, glandular-setulose dorsally, only exceptionally a trifle longer than submature fl-buds, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, most bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.25-0.65 mm, the subtmncate rim usually with a few filiform setulae or minute gland-tipped hairs, or with both, but none over 0.5 mm and sometimes all wanting; corolla narrowly funnelform (2.6-)2.8-4.7 mm, the glabrous tube early becoming pallid-membranous below the sinuses between lobes, appearing vertically striped in age, the ovate, nearly plane 1-nerved lobes 0.8-1.3 x 0.6-1 mm, usually at once thinly hispidulous and glandularsetulose but the plain hairs sometimes wanting and the setulae sometimes few and short; filaments pink, adnate at base to an obscure stemonozone 0.2-0.4 mm, exserted 5.5-11.5 mm; ovary densely glandular.
Pods numerous in dense but not incompressible clusters, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong and lunately incurved ±10-19 X 3-4 mm, 3-6-seeded, the undulately constricted replum ±0.3-0.4 mm diam., together with valves at once villosulous and densely hispid with yellowish gland-tipped setae to ±2 mm, the fully ripe valves (seldom observed) breaking up into individually dehiscent free-falling articles ±2.5- 3 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
Mimosa paraguariae was assigned by Micheli to ser. Leptopodae, later transferred by Hassler (1910b: 7) to ser. Asperatae where thought to be related to M. adenocarpa, and at last recognized by Burkart (1948: 61) as a member of ser. Stipellares, of which it has the enlarged paraphyllidia that resemble diminutive tme leaflets.
Its nearest relative in this series is M. iperoensis, which see for discussion of differences.
It appears far removed from M. adenocarpa by relatively broad herbaceous stipules, absence of aculei, and lack of interpinnal spicules.
The stipules vary somewhat in absolute and proportionate width, but I feel confident that the Paraguayan plants segregated by Hassler as a subspecies of Bahian M. cordistipula are nothing other than broadstipulate individuals of M. paraguariae sens, lat., of which they have all other characters, including the characteristic pod.
Tme M. cordistipula has much in common with M. paraguariae in the way of stipules and indumentum, but differs in spinulose-tipped leaf-stalks and leaflets, in trimerous flowers, in fruticulose habit of growth, and in conspicuously diflferent ecology.
The also Bahian M. ulbrichiana, closely akin to M. cordistipula and likewise trimerous, superficially resembles M. paraguariae in foliage and indumentum, but has essentially veinless leaflets, and pods merely glandular-pubemlent, not viscidly hispid.
While M. paraguariae appears stable in characters of flower and pod it varies in leaf-formula and particularly in quality of pubescence.
Singly or together these provide characters that support several varietal categories already described by Hassler, but here maintained in slightly modified form.
Key to varieties of M. paraguariae Gland-tipped setulae of stems, lf-stks and peduncles 0.2-0.8(-l) mm.
2.
Setulae simple or a few of those on stems and lf-stks bearing at random 1-2 branches, but none arborescently plumose, and aU setulae of lfts simple.
3.
Lf-stks of larger lvs 2.5-9.5 cm and their pinnae 5-9-jug., the rachis of longer ones 2-4.5 cm; lfts of longer pinnae to 16-24-jug.; setulae all simple 146a. var. paraguariae (p. 240).
3.
Lf-stks of larger lvs 1-1.5 cm and their pinnae 3-4-jug., the rachis of longer ones 1.5-2 cm; lfts to 12-14-jug.; some setulae of stems and lf-stks few-branched 146c. var. multiglandulosa (p. 240).
2.
Setulae of stems, lf-stks and peduncles, as well as some along margin of lfts, arborescently plumulose; pinnae 3-4-jug., but lfts of longer ones to 20-25-jug 146d. var. tomentosa (p. 241).
Gland-tipped setae of stems, If-axes and peduncles of mixed lengths, the longer ones attaining 1.4-4 mm 146b. var. chacoensis (p. 240).
146a. Mimosa paraguariae M. Micheli var. paraguariae.
M. paraguariae M. Micheli, 1883, I.e., t. 23, sens, str.—"[Paraguay:] Caaguazu in campis; Nov., Balansa n. 1834."—Holotypus not found under 1834 at G; paratypus (?), Caaguazu, Balansa 1458, G\—M. paraguariae war. genuina Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 7.
1910, nom. superfl. M. paraguariae M. Micheli var. genuina fma induta Hassler, 1910, I.e.—"Paraguay: in campo Apepu, flor. et fruct. mens. Dec; Hassler no. 5956."—Holotypus, G!; isotypi.
A! NY! P!—M. paraguariae var. induta (Hassler) Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 13.
1919.
M. cordistipula sensu M. Micheli, 1883: 58 (Balansa 1458, G! K!); non Bentham.
Foliage relatively ample (as given in key to varieties); setulae of stems and lf-stks all or almost all less than 1 mm, none over 1 mm.
In moist campo, apparently frequent locally near 300-350 m on and near the TebicuariMonday watershed between 25° and 26°S latitude in s.-e. Paraguay, and collected once on upper rio Iguafu in s.-centr. Parana, Brazil (mun. Guarapuava) and once in dry glassland near 100 m in the Parana valley in n.-w. Corrientes, Argentina (depto. Saladas).—Fl.
XII-III. 146b. Mimosa paraguariae M. Micheli var. chacoensis Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9:7.
1910.—"[Paraguay:] Gran Chaco: in campis Santa Rita, flor. et fmct. mens. Jan.; Hassler no. 2879."-Holotypus, G!; isotypus, NY! M. trachycarpa var. inermis Burkart in Reitz, ¥1. ilustr. catarin.
LEGU/I: 137.
1979.-"Santa Catarina: Campo Ere: Fazenda Campo Sao Vicente a 24 km ao este de Campo Ere, 900-1000 m, L. B. Smith & R. M. Klein 11578."—Holotypus, SI, not seen; isotypus, US!; paratypi, Smith & Reitz 12885, NY! US! Habit and foliage of var. paraguariae, different only in the much longer setae on stems, lf-stks, and especially on peduncles, the longer setae (1.2-)1.5-4mm.
In moist campo and at edge of thickets, mostly below 200 m but to 900 m in Sta. Catarina, scattered through the valleys of Parana and Umguay rivers in s.-e. Paraguay (s.-ward from depto. Alto Parana), Misiones, Argentina, and w. Sta. Catarina and w. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil; seemingly isolated in centr. Paraguay on the Chaco bank of rio Paraguay near 23°30'S.—Fl.
XII-II. 146c. Mimosa paraguariae M. Micheli var. multiglandulosa (Hassler) Bameby, comb, nov., based on autonym generated by M. cordistipula subsp. multiglandulosa var. tomentosa Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 5.
1910.—"Paraguay: In campis siccis pr. Caaguazu, flor. et fmct. mens. Mart.: Hassler no. 9234."-Holotypus, G!; isotypi, NY (2 sheets)! P! UC!—M. cordistipula subsp. multiglandulosa var. pubescens Hassler, 1910, I.e., nom. superfl. Different from sympatric var. paraguariae in small leaves (as described in key to varieties) and incipiently branched setae of stems and lf-stks.
In dry campo near 350 m, known only from the type-collection taken at Caaguazu (25°30'S, 56°W) in s.-e. Paraguay.-R. (?-)III-IV(-?).
The diminished foliage of the type-collection of var. multiglandulosa suggests a xeric or perhaps unseasonable ecotype of var. paraguariae, often collected near Caaguazu.
The incipiently branched setae of stem and leaf-stalks, which prefigure the elaborately plumose setae of var. tomentosa, suggest to the contrary a genetic difference.
146d. Mimosa paraguariae M. Micheli var. tomentosa (Hassler) Bameby, comb. nov. M. cordistipula subsp. multiglandulosa var. tomentosa Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 5.
1910.—"Paraguay: In campo San Bias (Sierra de Maracayu), flor. et fmct. mens. Dec: Hassler no. 5752."—Holotypus, G!; isotypus, NY! Different from var. paraguariae in plumose setae of stems, lf-stks and Ift-margins, and apparently also in leaf-formula, the pinnae as long but fewer, in number agreeing rather with multiglandulosa.
In campo at unrecorded elevation, collected once only in Sa. de Maracayu near the BrazilParaguay border, the precise locality not identified.
The var. tomentosa resembles var. paraguariae in every respect other than the tmly remarkable plumose setae which recall those of ser. Lepidotae, setae of a sort encountered elsewhere in sect. Batocaulon only in M. surumuensis.
147.
Mimosa cordobensis Ariza, Lorentzia 6: 7, fig. 1.
1986.—"Argentina.
Prav.
Cordoba:Depto.
Totoral: Sierra Chica (falda E): Arroyo Chilliorco .
.
. entre Ascochinga y Santa Catalina, A. T. HUNZIKER, ARIZA ESPINAR y BONZANI 24372, 26.
X.1982 "-Holotypus, CORD (not seen).
Ascending or trailing shrublets attaining 7 dm, glandular-setulose almost throughout and armed on intemodes with few, straight or gently acroscopic aculei, the lfts pubemlent above, glandular beneath, the globose capitula solitary in a succession of If-axils.
Stipules foliaceous, triangular-ovate ±2 X 1.5 mm, 1-nerved.
Z.^fl!v^5 subsessile, the petiole no longer than the interpinnal segments of rachis, the whole If-stk ± l-3(-4) cm; pinnae opposite (4-)5-7(-8)-jug., the rachis of longer ones ±1-1.5 cm; lfts crowded, opposite, in longer pinnae 1 l-16(-17)-jug., the blades oblong obtuse, attaining 2-2.5 x 0.8 mm, faintly 1-nerved dorsally.
Peduncles 3-4 cm; capitula without filaments ±6-7 mm diam.; bracts linearoblanceolate ±2.5 mm; flowers 4-meroiis 8-androus; calyx turbinate ±0.5 mm, the depressed-deltate lobes minutely ciliolate and glandfimbriolate; corolla 2.5-3 mm, the lobes minutely glandular; filaments pink, exserted ±5 mm.
Craspedia subsessile, narrowly oblong, gently decurved, ±20-40 x 3-5 mm, 3-7-seeded, the slender replum shallowly undulate-constricted, the valves densely stipitate-glandular.
On rocky stream banks, known only from the type-locality at e. foot of Sa Chica (±64°15'W, 30°50'S) in Cordoba, Argentina.-H. X-XI(-?).
The foregoing description is compiled from the protologue.
The species was surmised by the author to be most closely related to M. trachycarpa, but the protologue suggests even nearer affinity to smaU-leaved forms of M. paraguariae.
These differ, however, in lack of cauline aculei.
The discovery ofM. cordobensis established a notable westward range-extension for ser. Stipellares in Argentina.
148.
Mimosa iperoensis Hoehne, Arq. Bot. Estado Sao Paulo 1: 24.
1938.—Typus infra sub var. iperoensi indicatur.
Microphyllidious shrubs or subshrubs 4-8 dm with short defoliate tmnks arising from woody taproot or xylopodium and densely leafy hornotinous branchlets, usually unarmed but stems and lf-stks sometimes randomly armed with slender erect weak setaculei 1.5-2.5 mm, the young stems, foliage and peduncles densely viscid-villosulous with short fine, erect or antrorsely incumbent plain hairs and with slender erect yellowish gland-tipped setulae to 0.2-0.5 mm, the foliage olivaceous subconcolorous, bmnnescent when dry, the lfts finely villosulous or exceptionally glabrate on both faces, delicately glandfimbriolate, the globose capitula all axillary to distal Ivs on solitary or geminate peduncles, only sometimes prior to anthesis shortly pseudoracemose.
Stipules erect herbaceous, lanceolate or ovate-subcordate acute or acuminulate 1.5-3 x 0.6-1.3 mm, indistinctly 1-3-nerved, the margins sometimes revolute, the blade dorsally viscid-villosulous like stem, becoming dry but not or tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 1.5-6.5(-7.5) cm, the petiole (1-)2-10 x 0.55-0.8 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 2.5-12 mm, the ventral groove continuous (spicules 0); pinnae 3-9(- 12)-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of further ones 1-3.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.4-l(-1.2) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (9-)10- 20(-22)-jug., subequUong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.2-1.1(-1.6) mm distant from broadly ovate or suborbicular paraphyllidia 0.2-0.8 mm, the blades shortly oblong from deeply semicordate base, obtuse or obscurely apiculate at apex, the larger ones 2-3.7(-4) x 0.7-1.5 mm, 2.1-2.8 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 3-nerved from pulvinule, the stout subcentric midrib 1-3-branched on each side, the prominulous branches anastomosing with one anterior and one posterior, narrowly intramarginal nerve and thereby enclosing sunken areoles.
Peduncles 1.5-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments 4.5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts 1.3-2 x 0.3-0.4 mm, beyond middle glandular-setulose dorsally; flowers 4-merous, mostly 8-, sometimes 4- or 4- 7-androus, apparently all bisexual; calyx-tube campanulate 0.5-0.6 mm, glabrous or rarely minutely pubemlent, the obscurely lobulate rim either naked or microscopically glandular-ciliolate; corolla narrowly funnelform 2-3.2 mm, the glabrous tube becoming scarious and pallid in a line below each sinus, the ovate scarcely thickened 1-nerved lobes 0.8-1.2 x 0.6-0.75 mm, dorsally either hispidulous and setulose or subglabrous, marginally papillate; filaments free above an obscure stemonozone, pink, exserted 4-5 mm; ovary densely glandular.
Pods (poorly known) described under varieties, variable in outline but always (so far as seen) densely glandular-setulose overall.
The type ofM. iperoensis, most flowers of which were described as tetrandrous, was misinterpreted by Hoehne as a taxonomically isolated Eu-mimosa, but its tme affinity to the diplostemonous ser. Stipellares, in particular to M. paraguariae, was perceived by Burkart (1948: 23,65), who found the stamens variable in number, not constantly four but commonly between five and seven.
As long ago as 1820 the species had been collected in the same region by St. Hilaire, whose specimens are partly (CV1436bis, P) unarmed with normaUy octandrous flowers, and partly (CV 1410, P) randomly setaculeate and 5-8-androus.
No taxonomic distinction can be made between plants with perfect and partly imperfect androecia, and I do not here propose to recognize formally the aculeate state, pending verification in the field of its intrapopulational stabiUty.
I associate with the variable nucleus of populations in southeastern S. Paulo the Paraguayan plants that Hassler mistook for unarmed forms of M adenocarpa, a species significantly different in narrow stipules and paraphyllidia, in spiculate leaf-stalks, and in faintly 1 -nerved leaffets.
Some Paraguayan populations, however, differ from typical M. iperoensis in longer, more distant pinnae coinciding with slightly more numerous leaflets and glabrate corollas; these were first described by Hassler and reappear here in a new context.
Marked differences in width of pod are described under the varieties, but too few examples are at hand to establish their significance.
Mimosa iperoensis has almost everything in common with M. paraguariae, with which it is marginally sympatric on the Paraguayan Plateau, but it has smaller capitula, less exserted filaments, and smaller, thick-textured leaflets more coarsely venulose on the dorsal face.
Key to varieties of M. iperoensis 1.
Pinnae relatively long and far apart, the longer interpinnal segments of If-stk 7-12 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 20-35 mm and their lfts 16-22- jug 148a. var. paradenia (p. 242).
1.
Pinnae relatively short and crowded, the longer interpinnal segments of If-stk 3-7 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 10-18(-20) mm and their lfts 9- 15-jug 148b. var. iperoensis (p. 242).
148a. Mimosa iperoensis Hoehne var. paradenia Bameby, nom. et stat. nov. M. adenocarpa var. genuina fma inermis Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 7.
1910.-"Paraguay: In campis pr. Ipe hu, flor. et fmct. mens. Oct., Hassler no. 4945; .
.
. pr. Igatimi .
.
.
Hassler no. 5640 .
.
.
Punta Pora, Hassler no. 10008, leg. Rojas."
—Lectotypus, Hassler 4945, G!; isotypi, NY! P!; syntypi, no. 5640, A! NY! no. 10008, G! Leaves as described in key to varieties; pods cryptically stipitate, in profile linear-oblong ± 17 X 3 mm, straight or nearly so, 2^(-5)-seeded, the elliptic segments 3-5 mm.
In campo, ±200-300 m, known only from upper basin of rio Jejui-guazu, near 24°S in e. Paraguay.-R. IX-I(-?).
148b. Mimosa iperoensis Hoehne var. iperoensis.
M. iperoensis Hoehne, 1938, I.e., sens, str.— "Servi9o de Botanica e Agronomia: No. 36.751 —F. C Hoehne & A. Gehrt, Iper6, perto de Campo Largo, distrito de Sorocaba, S. Paulo, em 10.11.936."—Holotypus, SP, not seen; isotypi, GH!,
K!,
S!,
US (2 sheets)! M. adenocarpa var. subinermis Bentham fma paraguariensis Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 7.
1910.—"Paraguay: ... in regione fluminis Yhu, flor. et fmct. mens. Nov.: Hassler 9622;... in campis Punta Pora, flor. mens. Dec: Hassler no. 9961, leg. Rojas."
—Lectotypus, Rojas in Hassler 9961, G!; isotypus, W!; syntypi, Hassler 9622, G! GH! NY! M. adenocarpa var. multiglandulosa Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 8.
1910.-"Paraguay: In dumetis apricis in regione fluminis Yhu, flor. mens. Nov.; Hassler no. 9637."-Holotypus, G! Leaves as described in key to varieties; pods subsessile, in profile oblong and to 4-seeded or some elliptic 1-seeded, 11-25 x 5 mm, the replum ±0.5 mm diam., the bmnnescent valves breaking up into individually dehiscent free-falling articles 6-8 mm long; seeds compressed-obovoid ±3 X 2.5 mm, the testa fuscous dull.
In campo, of bicentric range in s.-e. S. Paulo and e. Parana, Brazil, and in s.-e. Paraguay: in Brazil at ±600 m from distr.
Sorocaba and Itapetininga, where just within the Tropic of Capricorn at lat. 47°40'W, s.-w. in Parana through Itarare to mun. Ponta Grossa near 25°S; in Paraguay local at 300-350 m in lat. 22°30'-25°20'S, from Sa. de Amambay to rio Yhu.—Fl.
X-II. 149.
Mimosa kermesina Otto & Dietrich, AUg.
Gartenzeitung 3(27): 209.
1835.—Described from plants cultivated at Berlin from seed collected in southeastern Brazil by Sello.—Presumed authentic specimen at MO (hb. Bemhardi.)! Mimosa lucidula Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 407.
1842.-"Brazil, Sello."
-Described from a wild specimen without flowers and one in flower cultivated at B, apparently from the same stock as the preceding.—Not represented at K, the holotypus perhaps Sello d.656 at +B = F Neg. 1337\ ? M. amphigena var. inermis Burkart, Darwiniana 7: 226.
1946.—"Umguay: Rivera, Tranqueras, D. Legrand 2422, 1.1941."—Holotypus, SI, not seen.
M. lucidula sensu Bentham, 1875: 430, 1876: 366.
Repeatedly branched unarmed shrubs, in cultivation attaining ± 1 m, appearing glabrous but the livid stems microscopically pubemlent and the immature lfts remotely minutely stipitateglandular, the mature lfts concolorous, lustrous brown when dry, the lfts strongly venulose beneath, the globose capitula solitary in distal Ifaxils.
Stipules erect lance-attenuate 3-4 x 0.6- 1 mm, strongly 1-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 8-20 mm, the petiole 1.5-5 x 0.25- 0.5 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 1.5-5 mm, the broad shallow ventral sulcus bridged between pinnae but spicules 0; pinnae 2-4(-"5")- jug., the rachis of distal pairs 6-13 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1 mm; lfts opposite, those of distal pinnae 8-12-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the first pair 0.6-1.3 mm distant from cordate-apiculate paraphylUdia 0.4-0.6 mm wide, the blades either oblong-obovate obtuse or narrowly oblong subacute, the longer ones 1.5- 4 X 0.6-0.85 mm, 2.5-5 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, coarsely bluntly 3-nerved beneath, the subcentric midrib 1-2-branched above middle, the anterior and posterior nerves each produced nearly to blade apex.
Peduncles (few seen) 11-16 mm; capitula without filaments 5 mm diam., the receptacle ±2 mm, the fl-buds obtuse glabrous; bracts linear-oblanceolate ±1.3 mm, 1-nerved persistent; perfect fls not seen, those of old cultivated material (MO) ±2.4 mm with 2-3 ovaries and stamens partly imperfect or suppressed; pod unknown.
An obscure species still known with certainty only from Sello's one collection and what is thought to be its progeny grown by F. Otto at Berlin; to be sought in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, or in Umguay.
In the context of its group M. kermesina is distinguished by lack of prickles, a leaf-formula of ii-v/8-12, and opposite, notably lustrous leaflets coarsely 3-nerved dorsally.
When rediscovered, its kinship to M. iperoensis and M. cruenta will require reassessment.
Granted the equation M. kermesina (1835) = M. lucidula (1842), proposed by Bentham in 1876, there is no argument about the correct name for this species.
Bentham may have known M. kermesina only from the condensed description given by Walpers (Repert.
1:883.
1842) and may not have seen Otto & Dietrich's detailed protologue, which faithfully matches the flowering specimens that survive.
150.
Mimosa cruenta Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 407.
1842, ex parte typica, legumine excepto.—"BrazU, Sello; Maldonado, Tweedie.'", the data expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 367.
1876 to: ".
.
. in Brasilia meridionali ad Barra da Campa: Sello; in mpibus juxta flumen Umguay: Tweedie.
.
. ."—Lectotypus (Bentham, 1876, I.e.: "specimina typica Tweedieana omnia aculeata sunt .
.
."
), Tweedie 75 in 1837 (fl), "on a rocky bank near Maldonado," K (hb. Hook.)!—The syntypi, Sello s.n. in hb. Benth. and hb. Hook.,
K! = M. sanguinolenta Bameby.
M. trachycarpa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 407.
1842.-"BrazU, Se//a"-Holotypus not found at K in 1988, but Fox 371 from Maldonado, Uruguay, Jan. 1833, K (hb. Hook.)! cited as M. trachycarpa by Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 368.
1876, is here considered authentic.
M. amphigena Burkart, Darwiniana 7(2): 221, fig. 2.
1946.—"Argentina.
Prov. de Entre Rios: Concordia .. .
P. G. Lorenz sin no. . .. 11.1876."—Holotypus, SI 15494, not seen, but the protologue unambiguous; probable isotypus, Lorentz 741, CORD (not seen).— M. amphigena var. typica Burkart, op. cit.
227.1946, nom. illeg. (?) M. amphigena var. glabrescens Burkart, Darwiniana 7: 226.
1946.-"BrasU.
Rio Grande do Sul, Quarai, Estancia do Jarau, Rambo 1.1945 (Herb. Rambo 26145 . ..)."—Holotypus, SI, not seen.
M. amphigena var. eglandulosa Burkart, Darwiniana 7: 226.
1946.—"Uruguay.. .
.
Paysandu, Chapicuy, Rosengurtt B-3660 .. .
19.1.1942 "-Holotypus, SI, not seen, but the protologue, and three spms at K (Gibert 996, Berro 5591, Pedersen 11635) annotated by Burkart, are decisive. (?) M. amphigena var. trachycarpoides Burkart, Darwiniana 7: 227.
1946.—Uruguay.
Salto, rio Arapey y Arroyo Valentin, B. Rosengurtt B962 .
.
.
28.1.1937 "-Holotypus, SI, not seen.
M. implexa sensu Bentham, 1876:366, ex parte, quoad fruct. et Gibert 645.
M. amphigena sensu Burkart, 1948: 72, 1987: 489, fig. 216 [left].
Microphyllous subshrubs from heavy woody rootstock, the diffuse or assurgent, randomly branched stems ±5-15 dm, almost always armed on most intemodes with one downwardly displaced infrapetiolar aculeus and often 1-2 infrastipular ones, the aculei straight horizontal or gently recurved and to 3-6 mm (exceptionally lacking), the young stems and lf-stks viscid-villosulous with variably proportioned fine plain hairs and slender gland-tipped setulae to 0.1-0.4 mm, the plane thick-textured subconcolorous lfts either glabrous or thinly pubemlent facially, almost always glandular-fimbriolate, the globose capitula mostly solitary but occasionally geminate in a series of If-axils along new branchlets, the peduncles about as long as or longer than the associated If.
Stipules erect lanceolate or narrowly triangular 2-3.5 X 0.6-1 mm, bluntly 1-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of longer lvs 3 - 17 mm (of some distal lvs shorter, no further described), the petiole including pulvinus 1-3 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 2-5 mm; pinnae of longer Ivs 2-4-jug., the rachis of distal pair 3.5-13 mm, the longer interfoUolar segments 0.4-0.9 mm; lfts opposite, those of distal pinnae 5-10(-l l)-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.6-1.3 mm distant from ovate or suborbicular paraphyllidia 0.4-0.8 mm, the blades oblong or linear-oblong from shortly auriculate base, those at mid-rachis 2.5- 4.5 X l.l-1.6mm, ±2.1-3.4(-3.7)timesaslong as wide, all nerveless above, beneath 3—4-nerved from pulvinule, the slightly displaced midrib commonly 1-branched distally, one strong posterior nerve and in broader lfts one anterior one nearly to blade apex, a weak and short outer posterior nerve sometimes perceptible.
Peduncles 14-38 mm; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds either simply pubemlent or both puberulent and glandular-setulose; bracts Unear 1.5- 2.8 X 0.15-0.2 mm, caducous; flowers mostly 4 (t. Burkart. exceptionally 3, 5)-merous diplostemonous, most or all bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.7-1.2 mm, extemally glabrous, the subulate teeth 0.25-0.4 mm, separated by wide shallow sinuses, the rim minutely ciliolate; corolla narrowly turbinate 2.7-3.3 mm, the lobes 0.75-1 x 0.7-1 mm, 1-nerved and distally a little thickened, incurved at apex; filaments bright pink, monadelphous through 0.45-0.6 mm, exserted 4-5.5 mm.
Pods usually several per capitulum, in profile undulately linear, straight or gently decurved, when well fertilized 18-25 x ±4.5 mm, (2-)4-6-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 1.5-3 mm, narrowly triangular at apex, the shallowly constricted replum 0.4-0.7 mm wide, the papery valves convex over each seed, the replum and valves alike gray-villosulous and viscid-setulose, the ripe valves breaking into individually dehiscent and free-falling, eUiptic articles 4-6 mm long; seeds plumply discoid 3-4 x 2.5-3 mm, the sublustrous testa fuscous and variably pallidspeckled.
In open stony meadows, on hilltops, and about rock-outcrops or river-bluffs, below 300 m, locally plentiful in the basin of rio Uruguai in n.- e. Argentina, adj. Brazil (Rio Grande do Sul) and w. Umguay, in lat. 28-33°S.-R. X-II(-?).
Mimosa cruenta is the species treated latterly by Burkart as M. amphigena, and may be separated from closely related M. sanguinolenta by unarmed stems and by pods that break, albeit sometimes tardily, into free-faUing articles.
The pubescence of foUage and pod varies in density and proportions of viUi and gland-tipped setulae, several states being distinguished taxonomically by Burkart.
I have not the material to settle one way or another the status of these forms, which require detailed observation in the field.
Typical M. cruenta corresponds to M. amphigena var. eglandulosa, and M. trachycarpa to the state with pronounced setular pubescence on the pod.
The fmit of M. cruenta, first collected by Gibert, was mistakenly attributed by Bentham (1876: 366) to M. implexa.
151.
Mimosa pseudotrachycarpa Bameby, sp. nov., hucusque in herbariis cum M. trachycarpa Bentham (quae eadem est ac M. cruenta vera) commutata, sed ab ea imprimis stipulis margine revolutis foliolisque subenerviis diversa. —Brazil.
Parana: Tamandua, 24.
XI. 1910 (fl), P. Dusen 10824. —Holotypus, NY; isotypi, GH, K. Stiffly branched microphyllous shrubs attaining 9-12(-?) dm, armed either close below or far below each node with one infrapetiolar and two infrastipular, straight or recurved, stout vulnerant aculei 3-5.5 mm (one or more of each triad sometimes wanting), the young stems, lf-stks and peduncles densely viscid-puberulent with minute, forwardly incurved hairs and erect glandtipped setulae 0.1-0.2 mm tall, the foliage (dry) brown-olivaceous concolorous, the thick-textured plane lfts glabrous on ventral or on both faces, minutely ciliolate, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula single in primary If-axils or in If-axils of a succession of lateral short-shoots, forming an effuse leafy thyrse or panicle.
Stipules firm ovate-deltate 1-2 x 1-2 mm, those of primary lvs spreading-recurved, ventrally convex, becoming dry deciduous, those of axillary brachyblasts smaUer ascending.
Leaf-stalks (1-) 2-11 mm, the petiole often reduced to livid pulvinus, potentially attaining 2 mm, the interpinnal segments 0.5-4 mm, the ventral groove continuous (spicules 0); pinnae of most lvs 2-4-jug. (of some small distal Ivs 1-jug., no further described), accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 5-9.5 mm, the interfoUolar segments 0.4-1 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 7-12(-13)-jug., subequilong except at base of rachis, the first pair 0.2-1.2 mm distant from ovate paraphylUdia 0.3- 0.5 mm, the blades oblong obtuse from semicordate base, the longer ones 2-3 x 0.85-1.2 mm, 2-3 times as long as wide, the venation immersed.
Peduncles 5-30 mm; capitula without filaments ± 7 x 5-6 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the plumply obovoid fl-buds either glabrous or gray-pubemlent; bracts elliptic or oblanceolate 1-1.5 X 0.3-0.6 mm, either pubemlent dorsaUy or merely ciliolate, caducous; y/ow^r^ 4- merous 8-androus, all or almost all bisexual; calyx submembranous campanulate 0.6-0.8 mm, extemally either glabrous or pubemlent, the broadly triangular or depressed-deltate teeth 0.1- 0.25 mm, the rim microscopically ciliolate; corolla narrowly turbinate 2.1-3 mm, the membranous, shallowly concave, ovate lobes 0.7-1 x 0.8 mm, the central nerve faintly branched; filaments lilac-pink, united at very base into a stemonozone below the ovary, exserted 4-5.5 mm; pod not seen.
In dry stony campo and at edge of gallery woodland, best known from ±700-900 m in n.- e. Parana (Jaguariaiva, Arapoti, Ponta Grossa), Brazil; not reported from Sta. Catarina (Burkart, 1979), but reappearing near 700 m in n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul (mun. Vaccaria).—Fl.
IX-XII(- The type-collection of M. pseudotrachycarpa was misidentified by Dusen as M. trachycarpa Bentham, a name that is here interpreted as a synonym of M. cruenta Bentham.
From the latter it is clearly different in strongly or at least incipiently revolute stipules and in almost nerveless leaflets.
152.
Mimosa sanguinolenta Bameby, sp. nov., diu sub nomine M. cruenta cognita, a M. cruenta vera caulibus inermibus (nec aculeatis) leguminisque valvulis maturis dissolutis) diversa.—Brazil.
Sta. Catarina: Mun.
Lajes, Morro Pinheiro Seco, 3 km e. of Lajes, 900- 950 m, 15.1.1957 (fl), L. B. Smith & R. Reitz 70060.-Holotypus, NY.
M. cruenta sensu Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 407, ex parte (Sello s.n.,
K!).
1842, lectotypo ab ipso Benthamio in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 367 in nota proposito excepto.
M. cruenta sensu Burkart, Darwiniana 7(2): 225.
1946 & 8(1): 70, fig. 7C. 1948; Burkart, 1979: 138, 1987: 489, fig. 216 [right].
Unarmed microphyllidious small shrubs and subshrubs from xylopodium, (4-)5-14 dm tall, with either erect or diffuse-assurgent, distally branched stems, finely villosulous throughout with erect or forwardly curved hairs 0.1-0.35 mm, eglandular, the epidermis of stems exfoliating in second year and the defoliate tmnks smooth, the whole plant when dry dark brown or livid, the thick-textured plane lfts concolorous, sometimes glabrate on upper face, nowhere setose, the subglobose capitula single or rarely geminate in a long series of If-axils on peduncle longer than subtending If.
Stipules erect ovateor broadly lance-acuminate (1-) 1.5-3.5 x (0.6-)0.8-1.5 mm, bluntly 1-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including small livid pulvinus 1-11 mm, low-convex dorsally, narrowly winged laterally, the petiole l-2.5(-3) x 0.4-0.6 mm, the interpinnal segments l-3(-4) mm; pinnae commonly either 2-3- or 1-2-jug., rarely mostly 1- or all 3-4-jug., when more than 1-jug. a little accrescent upward, the rachis of distal (or only) pair 5-18 mm terminating in a lanceolate appendage, the interfoliolar segments 0.3-1 mm; lfts (4-)5-9(-10)-jug., accrescent distally, the first pair 0.6-1.2 mm distant from obliquely obovate or transversely dilated (sometimes unequal) paraphyllidia 0.5-0.9 x 0.6-1 mm, the blades oblong or oblong-obovate from deeply semicordate base, the distal ones (2.1-)2.5^.5(-5.2) x 0.8-2(-2.2) mm, 2.3-3 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath (3-)4-nerved from pulvinule, the slightly displaced midrib 1 -branched on each side distally, the inner posterior and (in broader lfts) one anterior primary nerve expiring beyond mid-blade, the rest very short, the venation coarse and bluntly prominulous.
Peduncles 14-29 mm; capitula without filaments 6-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds thinly gray-hispidulous and rarely in addition with a few claviform, perhaps glandular trichomes; bracts linear, attenuate at each end, 1.2-2 X 0.2-0.3 mm, pubemlent and ciliolate, persistent; flowers 4(-5)-merous diplostemonous, all or almost all bisexual; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate 0.5-0.9 mm, either pubemlent or glabrous extemally, the low-deltate teeth 0.1-0.2 mm, minutely ciliolate; corolla turbinate 2.5-3.4 mm, the ovate 1-nerved, apically cucullate but not thickened lobes 1.1-1.5 X 0.7-1 mm; filaments pink, united at base into a stemonozone to 0.4 mm, the longer set exserted 5.5-6.5 mm.
Pods commonly 3-15 per capitulum, spreading and ascending in loose umbellate cluster, sessile or cuneately pseudostipitate, in profile varying from oblong-eUiptic to linear-oblong (7-)10-23 X 5-6 mm, (1-)2-6(-8)-seeded, the straight or shallowly constricted replum 0.7- 1.2 mm diam., short-cuspidate at apex, persistent entire after dehiscence of valves, the stiflly papery nigrescent valves low-coUiculate over each seed, when ripe separating entire from replum and from each other except at very base, basipetally dehiscent and gaping to release the seeds, the replum and valves alike finely minutely pubemlent eglandular; seeds (few seen) obliquely descending ±4.5 x 3 mm, the testa fuscous.
In campo, in Parana attaining 800-1000 m but lower w.- and s.-ward, scattered from n.-e. Argentina (Entre Rios to Misiones) e. to upland and Atlantic s.-e. Brazil and Umguay, in Brazil extending rarely n. through centr. Sta. Catarina to the Iguagu valley in w. Parana (mun. Marmoleiro and Larangeiras do Sul).—Fl.
XI-II(-?).
While accepting without reservation Burkart's analysis of the original M. cruenta Bentham into two species, one (M. amphigena Burkart) with armed stems and craspedia, the other (M. cruenta sensu Burkart) with unarmed stems and valvately dehiscent pods, I cannot endorse his typification of M. cruenta by Sello 3085 at C, illustrated by Field Museum Negative 21876.
It is not disputed that Bentham derived the protologue of M. cruenta from elements of two taxa.
In Flora brasiliensis (1876, I.e.) Bentham admitted as much: "Specimina typica Tweedieana omnia aculeata sunt, Selloana aculeata et inermia.
Specimina pauca inermia pinnis 4-5-jugis varietatem vel forte speciem distinctam indicant."
This forthright statement unequivocaUy lectotypifies M. cruenta by the aculeate plants collected in Umguay valley by Tweedie, whose field-note on color of the flowers suggested the epithet.
These plants represent in my opinion nothing other than M. amphigena Burkart, which consequently must fall into synonymy.
Sello's unarmed plant that was mentioned by Bentham as found among specimens of M. cruenta has apparently never received a valid name, though it has been described in meticulous detail and weU illustrated by Burkart (1948, 1979, 1987, U.cc.) under the name M. cruenta.
The specimen chosen as typus of M. sanguinolenta is among those identified by Burkart as M. cruenta.
I have seen no material corresponding with the plant described by Burkart as: M. cruenta var. glabra Burkart, Darwiniana 7: 522.
1947.-".
.
.
BrasU.
Rio Grande do Sul, Morro da Gloria cerca de Porto Alegre, en campo, B. Rambo 30598, 18.
IX.1945 " - Holotypus, SI; paratypi, Rambo 175, 26928, 27309, all SI.
According to the protologue this appears to be a completely glabrate state of M. sanguinolenta, unarmed and with valvately dehiscent pods of the species.
153.
Mimosa hatschbachii Bameby, sp. nov., statura fmticulosa et caulibus armatis inter Stipellares juxta M. pseudotrachycarpam ponenda, ab ea caulibus diffusis, foliomm majorum petiolo communi longiori 8-18 (nec 2- 11) mm longo pinnisque suis saepissime 4-6-, rarius 7 (nec 2-4)-jugis, necnon androecii filamentis in tubum 0.4-1.5 mm longum monadelphis diversa.—Brazil.
Parana: Mun.
Guarapuava, campo rochoso, Rio Campo Real, 26.x. 1980 (fl), G. Hatschbach 43241.-holotypus, MBM 68611; isotypus, NY.—Ibid.,
Fda.
Capao Redondo, 1000 m, 16.
XII.1965 (fr), R. Reitz & R. M. Klein 77570.-Paratypi, NY, US. Procumbent or diffuse, freely branched, delicately microphyllidious shrublets ± 3-5 dm armed on intemodes and randomly on dorsal or lateral ribs of lf-stks with recurved brownish-stramineous aculei 0.5-2 mm, the slender homotinous branchlets and If-axes viscid-villosulous with minute forwardly incurved hairs and very slender erect gland-tipped setulae to (0.05-)0.1-0.4 (-0.5) mm, the tiny thick-textured olivaceous concolorous lfts facially glabrous, gland-ciliolate, the small, plumply ellipsoid or globose capitula solitary or geminate on peduncle as long or nearly twice as long as the associated If.
Stipules flrm, green when young, lanceolate, deltate or broadly triangular 0.7-3.2 x 0.5-1 mm, persistent.
L^<2/- 5?^/A:s 8-32 mm, the petiole (1-)2-6 x 0.25-0.45 mm, the interpinnal segments 1.5-7 mm, the narrow ventral groove continuous between pinna-pairs (spicules 0); pinnae 4-6(-7)-jug., subdecrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 3.5-9(-12) mm, the pulvinus scarcely differentiated, the small ovate paraphyUidia inserted close to primary If-stk; lfts of longer pinnae 6-9(-10)- jug., opposite and subequilong, the first pair 0.4- 0.8 mm distant from paraphyUidia 0.2-0.3 mm, the blades oblong or oblong-eUiptic obtuse, the longer ones 1-2 x 0.3-0.9 mm, 2.1-4.2 times as long as wide, either veinless extemally or faintly 3-nerved dorsally.
Peduncles 1.5-5.5 cm, either simply glandular-setulose or also setaculeate; capitula without filaments 4.5-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds thinly pubemlent, or minutely viscid-setulose or -granular; bracts oblanceolate acute ±1.5-2 mm, the blade pubemlent or viscid-setulose dorsally; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, all or most bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.3-0.5 mm glabrous, the rim asymmetrically short-denticulate; corolla narrowly turbinate 2.2-2.6 mm, the triangular-ovate thin-textured 1 -nerved lobes 0.65-1 X 0.5-0.7 mm, sometimes buUately thickened at tip; filaments pink, monadelphous through (0.3-)0.4-1.5 mm, exserted 3-5 mm.
Pods several per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong-eUiptic, including the long, dorsoventrally compressed terminal cusp (10-) 14-16 x 4 mm, (2-)3-4-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.5-0.6 mm diam., the brown papery valves bullately elevated over each seed, together with replum thinly pubemlent and glandular-setulose overall, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 2.5-3 mm long (the terminal one longer); seeds compressed-obovoid ±2.8 X 2.1 mm, the smooth testa fuscouscastaneous.
In stony campo and about basalt outcrops, near 1000 m, known only from the heights of Sa.
Geral in mun. Guarapuava (Rio Campo Real; Fda.
Capao Redondo; Canta Galo), near 25°20'S in s.-centr. Parana, Brazil.-Fl.
VIII-XI. This delicately attractive little shmb mimosa resembles M. pseudotrachycarpa in armed stems and in diminutive foliage, but is weakly diffuse, not stiffly fruticulose, has more numerous pairs of pinnae, and evidently, often strongly monadelphous stamens.
It is dedicated with gratitude and admiration to Dr. Gert Hatschbach of Curitiba, whose collections of mimosa, most generously shared with NY, have contributed enormously to this revision.
154.
Mimosa uraguensis Hooker & Amott, Bot. Misc.
3: 202.
1833.-"Uraguay [sic], Baird.''- Holotypus, P. Baird s.n.,
K (hb. Hook.)!—A specimen numbered B171 in hb. Meissner. (NY!) is possibly isotypic.
M. uraguensis sensu Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 407.
1842 (""Uruguayensis""); Lindley, Edward's Bot. Reg.
28: t. 33.
1842 ('"uruguensis""); Paxton, R. Gard. 2: 129, fig. 200.
1883 (""uruguensis"); Burkart, 1948: 67,fig.7U, lam. 3 (""urugUensis"); Lombardo, 1964: 61, fig. 49 (""uruguensis'J, Burkart, 1987: 489, fig. 215 (pulchra!) ("'uruguensis'').
M. implexa (?) sensu Parodi, Darwiniana 6: lam 2.
1943.
Widely densely branched shrubs attaining 3 m, randomly armed on intemodes with 1-3 straight, ascending or horizontal straight aculei 2-7 mm (but some branchlets unarmed), either glabrous throughout or minutely vestigially glandular-setulose on growing tips and lf-stks, the smooth brown older stems and concolorous thick-textured lfts quite glabrous, the globose capitula on solitary peduncle axillary to coeval lvs below the branch-tips.
Stipules ovate or triangular-cordate 1-3 X 1-2 mm, 1-nerved, persistent.
Z.^(2/-5^<3/A:5 5-18(-20) mm, the petiole and interpinnal segments 3-9 mm, the ventral groove continuous between pinna-pairs (spicules 0); pinnae 1-2 (-3)-jug., the rachis 7-20 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 8-13-jug., either opposite or alternate along rachis, the first pair 0.7-2.5 mm distant from an unequal pair or from the one exterior solitary paraphyllium, these ovate-cordate or suborbicular 0.4-0.8 mm, the Ift-blades oblong or narrowly oblong obtuse, the longer ones 4-6 x 1-2.7 mm, ±2.3-4 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, the subcentric midrib and 1-2 posterior nerves sometimes weakly prominulous beneath.
Peduncles 1.5-3.5(-4) cm; capitula without filaments 4.5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds thinly minutely capitellate-glandular; bracts obovate ± 1 mm; flowers normally 4-merous 8-androus; calyx membranous campanulate 0.55-0.95 mm, glabrous extemally, the rim minutely denticulate; corolla narrowly vaseshaped 2.8-3.3 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.7-0.9 mm; filaments vivid pink, free, exserted 4.5-6 mm.
Pods 1-5 per capitulum, subsessile but sometimes attenuate at base, the Unear-oblong body when well fertilized 20-45 x 4-6 mm, 4-7-seeded, the almost straight replum ±0.7 mm diam., the firm, smooth and glabrous, or minutely glandular, or rarely at once glandular and thinly setulose valves low-colliculate over each seed, when ripe separating entire from replum or at times tardUy and imperfectly fractured between one or more pairs of seeds.
Forming riparian thickets along and below the high water line, local along the banks of rio Umguay between ±29° and 33°S latitude in e. Corrientes and Entre Rios, Argentina, in adj. Umguay, and to be expected in s.-w. comer of Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU.-Fl.
X-I(-II).
WhUe the foregoing description of M. uraguensis is derived directly from specimens, the concept of the species owes everything to Burkart's exemplary revision (1948, I.e.).
Glabrous leaflets, alternate along the pinna rachis in most or many leaves, an essentially valvate dehiscence of the pod, and particularly an adaptation to intermittently flooded banks of the Umguay River are the principal diagnostic features in the context of ser. Stipellares.
I differ from Burkart only in reverting to the original spelling of the epithet, evidently intentional because Hooker referred to the country itself as Uraguay.
The variant spelling reappears also in Inga uraguensis Hook.
155.
Mimosa bracteolaris Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 408.
1842.-"BrazU, Sello.''- Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K! = NY Neg. 1871; presumed isotypi, +B = F Neg. 13071 BM! G ["banks of the Plate"]! M! NY! P! W! M. bracteolaris sensu Bentham, 1875: 431, 1876: 368; Malme, 1931: 13: "inter rio Pardo et Bage [Rio Grande do Sul], Sellow d. 1569 et d. 1603."
Apparently herbaceous from woody root, the simple or proximally few-forked, unarmed stems ±35 cm, incurved-ascending, at anthesis defoliate proximally and livid glabrate, thence densely leafy and passing into a rather densely leafybracteate, shortly exserted pseudoraceme of globose capitula, the foliate stems together with lvs and infforescence villous with fine straight erect hairs to ± 1 mm, neither setose nor glandular, the concolorous, in old specimens purplish-brown, lfts thinly gray-villosulous on both faces.
Stipules foliaceous ovate-acuminate 2.5- 3.5 X 0.7-1.4 mm, prominently 1-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (3-)4-ll mm, the petiole including pulvinus 1.5-3 mm, the single interpinnal segment 2-8 mm; interpinnal spicule 0; pinnae 2-jug., the distal pair a little longer, their rachis 8-14 mm with interfoliolar segments 2-4 mm; lfts 3-4(-5)-jug., the first pair 2-3 mm distant from elliptic obtuse paraphyllidia 0.3-0.4 mm, the first and last pairs a little smaller than the penultimate, the plane papery blades obliquely ovate-elliptic from broadly semicordate base, at apex low-deltate apiculate, the longer ones 7-11 X 3-6 mm, 1.7-2.3 times as long as wide, all palmately 4(-5)-nerved from pulvinule, the primary veins on each side of displaced midrib produced almost to blade apex, on exterior side branched distally, the secondary venules camptodrome just within the margin, the venation coarsely prominulous only beneath.
Peduncles 15-25 mm; capitula without filaments or emergent bracts 6-7 mm diam., the densely gray-villosulous ff-buds prior to anthesis surpassed by linear-attenuate bracts ±4-5 x QA mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.5 mm, extemally gray-villosulous and -ciliolate, the rim shallowly deltate-denticulate; corolla ±2,7 mm, narrowly turbinate and subprominulously 4-costate, the ovate acute cymbiform 1-nerved lobes ±0.9-0.6 mm; filaments (presumably pink) free to base, exserted ±4 mm; ovary pilosulous; pod unknown.
In unknown habitat but to be expected in open stony campo, apparently collected only by Sello, about 1815-1817, either in s. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil or in adjacent Umguay.
Mimosa bracteolaris is distinguished among unarmed Stipellares by low stature, gray-villosulous indumentum without trace of setulae or glands, a simple leaf-formula (±ii/3-5, so far as known), and capitula hispid before anthesis with emergent linear bracts.
The mature fmit, whether a craspedium or valvately dehiscent, may indicate closer kindred in the series than can be guessed at present.
An aged specimen, cryptically labelled 1460 but without indication of collector, in the National Herbarium at Rio de Janeiro, very closely resembles authentic M. bracteolaris, and may in fact be part of Sello's collection.
156.
Mimosa implexa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 411.
1842.-"BrazU, 5^//o."-Holotypus, K (herb.
Benth.)!; isotypi, Sello 3028, collected, t. Malme, 1931: 13: "inter EncruzUhada et Ca^apava [Rio Grande do Sul]", +B = F Neg. 1329! F (clastotypus)! K (s.n.,
herb.
Hook.)! M. implexa sensu Bentham, 1875: 430, 1876: 366 ex parte, exclus. fr.
Prostrate unarmed, freely branched, densely microphyllous shrublet forming mats of foliage +4(_7) dm diam., the homotinous growth thinly viscid-puberulent with minute plain hairs and capitellate setulae to 0.25 mm, the concolorous subresinous lfts glabrous facially, minutely ciliolate, the globose capitula solitary in If-axils on peduncle much longer than subtending If.
Stipules erect, triangularor deltate-acuminulate ±0.7-1 mm, nearly as wide, persistent.
Leafstalks including pulvinus 1-1.5 x 0.5 mm, obscurely sulcate, spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the pulvinus subobsolete, the rachis 4-9 mm, the interfoliolar segments ±0.5-1 mm; lfts 4-7-jug., decrescent proximally, the first pair 0.4-0.8 mm distant from ovate paraphyllidia 0.5-0.7 mm, the blades oblong-eUiptic from semicordate base, obscurely deltate-apiculate, the larger ones ± 3 - 4.5 X 0.9-1.5 mm, all nerveless above, bluntly 3-nerved dorsally, the midrib subcentric, simple or faintly 1-branched beyond middle, the one anterior and one posterior primary nerve produced well beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles 2-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments 6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse ff-buds densely minutely pubemlent; bracts linear-oblanceolate ±1.5 mm, eciliate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate ±0.6 x 0.6 mm, the depresseddeltate teeth at most 0.2 mm, the orifice minutely ciliolate; corolla vase-shaped 3 mm, the ovate, shallowly convex lobes 1 x 0.8 mm, pubemlent extemally, minutely densely fimbriolate around apex; filaments free, exserted 4-4.5 mm; ovary glabrous; pod unknown.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be sought in open stony campo or about rock outcrops, supposedly found by Sello in the region of Sa. das Encantadas in south-central Rio Grande do Sul, not otherwise known.
This is apparently a small matted shmb, notable in ser. Stipellares for conjugately pinnate leaves.
The fmit described by Bentham (1876, I.e.) is that of M. amphigena, the M. cruenta of this work, as recognized by Burkart in annotation of Gibert 625 at Kew.
157.
Mimosa bifurca Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 407.
1842.—Typus infra sub var. bifurca indicatur.
Erect unarmed microphyllidious shrubs 1-4 m with purplish-castaneous defoliate older stems paniculately branched and densely leafy distally, glabrous except for sometimes minutely puberulent lf-stks, Ift-margins and fls, but charged throughout when young with tiny sessile or immersed excretory glands, the emergent foliage glutinous, the firm plane concolorous lfts glandpunctulate or lustrously resin-spotted either dorsally or on both faces, the globose capitula fasciculate by 2-5 (rarely solitary) either in distal If-axils or at leafless nodes of shortly exserted pseudoracemes terminal to branchlets.
Stipules variable in form, either deltate to triangular and erect, or triangular-lanceolate and cochleately retroarcuate upon themselves, then appearing subglobose.
Leaf-stalks (1.5-)2-5.5(-7) cm, the petiole 5-16(-25) mm, at middle 0.45-1 mm diam., the intervals between pinnae 4-13(-15) mm, the ventral groove continuous, the ventral ribs somewhat dilated at insertion of pinnae; pinnae 2-6(-9)-jug., distally accrescent, the pairs seldom exactly opposite and one member of furthest pair sometimes appearing terminal, the rachis of longer ones 2-6(-9) cm, the intervals between successive lfts on each side 0.9-4 mm; lfts alternate, of longer pinnae 15-40 on each side of rachis, the first 0.3-2 mm distant from transversely dilated or reniform, rarely suborbicular paraphyllidia 0.4-1.1 mm wide, the blades sessile against rachis, obliquely elliptic or rhombicelliptic from proximally dUated or auriculate base, either obtuse or apiculate at apex, those at midrachis 2.5-7 X 1-3 mm, all apparently veinless above or on both faces, or beneath weakly 2(- 3)-nerved from pulvinus, the moderately displaced midrib and the posterior nerve subequilong.
Peduncles 3-16 mm; capitula without filaments 4-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts cuneate-oblanceolate 0.3-0.8 mm, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, a few proximal ones staminate and smaller; calyx membranous campanulate 0.5-1.1 mm, either symmetrically minutely 4-denticulate or dilated on abaxial side; corolla vase-shaped (1.6-)1.9- 2.6 mm, the ovate lobes 0.5-1 x 0.5-0.8 mm, at apex slightly thickened and involute, externaUy minutely pubemlent; filaments pink, at base very obscurely monadelphous, exserted 3-7 mm; ovary minutely glandular, becoming glutinous at early stage of maturity.
Pods (of var. bifurca) 1- several from near top of receptacle, in profile undulately linear, tapering at base into a stipe ±4-6 mm, when weU fertilized 30-45 x 3.5-5 mm, 6-10-seeded, the replum ±0.5 mm diam., deeply constricted between seeds, the ripe valves papery brown, separating from replum and breaking up into elliptic biconvex, individually indehiscent articles ±4-4.5 mm long, the whole pod minutely glandular or glutinous when young but the glands less apparent in age; ripe seeds not seen.
The almost exclusively extratropical M. bifurca is readily recognized by the syndrome of glutinous foliage devoid of setae, orbicular-reniform paraphyllidia, and sessile leaflets arranged alternately along the pinna-rachis.
It varies much in stature, in display of capitula either in emersed pseudoracemes or in mostly axillary patterns, in leaf-formula, and in size of leaflets.
The often alternate insertion of pinnae along the leaf-stalk sometimes suggests an imparipinnate leaf.
The common forms of M. bifurca, widespread from eastem Paraguay through northeastern Argentina to interior Umguay and (cf. Burkart, 1979: 134 + map) Atlantic Santa Catarina, have uniformly tiny leaflets (variable nevertheless in number) and conventionally plane, triangular or deltate stipules appressed to the stem.
Locally in Paraguay the species is represented by a relatively coarse var. hassleriana, distinguished by large, mutually distant leaflets.
Perhaps no more than a form of this is var. reducta, with only one or two pairs of pinnae to the leaf.
Finally var. desmanthoides, localized so far as known in southeastern S. Paulo and disjunct within the range of var. bifurca in Misiones, Argentina, differs substantially from var. bifurca only in bizarrely modified stipules.
It remains to be ascertained whether these stipules are a casual lusus or genetically determined.
Key to varieties of M. bifurca I. Stipules triangular or depressed-deltate, the plane blade erect, appressed to stem, sometimes short and obscure.
2.
Pinnae of larger lvs 1-2-jug 157b. var. reducta (p. 251).
2.
Pinnae of larger lvs 3-6(-9)-jug. 3.
Lfts at mid-rachis of ampler lvs 1.5-3.5(-4) x 1-1.5 mm; interruptedly widespread from s.-e. Paraguay to n. Corrientes, Argentina, e. to e. Sta Catarina in Brazil, and Uruguay 157a. var. bifurca (p. 251).
3.
Lfts at mid-rachis of ampler lvs 4.5-7.5 x 1.8-2.5(-3) mm; local in Paraguay 157c. var. hassleriana (p. 251).
1.
Stipules ventraUy bullate and recurved upon themselves into the form of a hollow green vesicle; lfts of var. bifurca; s.-e. S. Paulo (Paranapanema; Itapetininga), BrazU and locally in lower Parana valley in Misiones (Candelaria), Argentina 157d. var. desmanthoides (p. 251).
157a. Mimosa bifurca Bentham var. bifurca.
M. bifurca Bentham, 1842, I.e., sens, str. —"BrazU, Se/Zo."
-Holotypus [K caret!], Sello 5035 +B = F Neg. 1303 + fragm at F!; isotypus, P! M. hassleriana subsp. microphylla + var. virgata Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 8.
1910.- "Paraguay: in dumetis pr. flumen Jejui-guazu, fl. mens. Sept.; Hassler no. 4666."—Holotypus, G! = NY Neg. IIS30.—M. filiformis sensu Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 555.
1904; non Bentham.
M. hassleriana subsp. microphylla var. multijuga Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 9.
1910. "
Paraguay: ad ripas fluminis Tebicuary, fl. mens. Jan.; Hassler no. 490la."
-Holotypus, G! (?) M. rosariensis N. Mattos, Loefgrenia 54: 2, cum fig. (folium).
1971.—"Brasil.
Estado do Rio Grande do Sul: a 36 km de Rosario do Sul, ao pe da Serra do Cavera, na Estancia da Serra, 29-IX-1970, fl; em 2-XII-1970, fr.,
Paulo Annes Gon9alves s.n."
-Holotypus, PACA, not seen, but the protologue, especially the lf-formula and alternate lfts, suggestive of M. bifurca.
M. bifurca sensu Bentham, 1875: 430, 1876: 365.
M. hassleriana sensu Burkart, 1948: 65,fig.6H; 1979: 135, exclus. syn. M. desmanthoides.
Foliage and stipules as described in key to varieties; capitula mostly 4-5 mm diam. In campo, sometimes (in Argentina, Burkart) forming pure thickets, scattered over e. Paraguay s.-ward from the Jejui-guazu valley to n.-e. Argentina (Misiones and n. Corrientes); apparently disjunct in e. Sta Catarina, Brazil and in e. Umguay (Treintay Tres).—Fl.
IX-ll.—Juquiri(Brazil); aromita, curupay-mi (Argentina).
157b. Mimosa bifurca Bentham var. reducta (Hassler) Bameby, comb. nov. M. hassleriana var. reducta Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 8.
1910.—"Paraguay: In campis siccis pr. Estrella, flor. mens. Jun.: Hassler no. 10470, leg. Rojas."
—Holotypus, G (2 sheets)! = NY Neg. 11829; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54885; GH! K! Pinnae 1-2-jug., the rachis of longer ones 5-9 cm; longest lfts ±3-3.2 x 2-2.2 mm.
In campo, near 500 m (?), known only from the type-locality on w. slope of Sa. de Maracayu, close to the Brazilian frontier at 22°20'S in depto. Amambay, Paraguay.—Fl.
VI-? The modified leaf-formula of var. reducta is visually arresting, but its constancy within the population requires observation in the field.
157c. Mimosa bifurca Bentham var. hassleriana (Chodat) Bameby, comb, nov., based on autonym generated by M. hassleriana var. reducta Hassler, 1910, I.e. supra.
M. hassleriana Chodat in Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 557 [=P1. hassler.
413].
1904.- " [Paraguay].
.
. inter mpes in collibus pr. Tobaty, Sept., [Hassler] n. 6280."—Holotypus, G! = FNeg.
28212; isotypi, F! = FNeg.
54838, GH! K! MO! S! W ! - M hassleriana var. genuina Hassler, 1910, I.e., nom. illeg. M. hassleriana var. genuina fma intermedia Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 8.
1910.-"Paraguay: adripashumidasfluminisTebicuary,flor.mens.
Jan.; Hassler no. 9401."—Isotypus, NY! Piptadenia sp. sensu Micheli, 1889: 90.
Mimosa hassleriana sensu Bernardi, Boissiera 35: 148.
1984.
Foliage and stipules as described in key to varieties; capitula mostly 5.5-7 mm diam. In either moist or dry stony campo, apparently localized in s.-e. Paraguay (Tobati; Parque Ybycui; Pirebebui; rio Tebecuari).—Fl.
IX-II. 157d. Mimosa bifurca Bentham var. desmanthoides (Hoehne) Bameby, stat. nov. M. desmanthoidesHoehne, Revista Mus. Paulista 10: 656, pi. 3.
1918.-"Museu Paulista: N.° 4475, Alberto Lofgren, Paranapanema (em cultivo no Horto Botanico). dez.
1899.
Specimen do Herv.
Commissao Geografica e Geologica do Estado de S. Paulo [7572^]."-Holotypus, SP, not seen; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 13031 NY! Foliage of var. bifurca, but stipules as described in key to varieties.
In campo, apparently local, near 650 m on headwaters of rio Paranapanema, on and near the tropic line in s.-e. S. Paulo (Paranapanema; Itapetininga); and distantly disjunct near 215 m within the range of var. bifurca in lower Parana valley in Misiones, Argentina (Sta Anna; near Candelaria).-H. VIII-XI(-?).
158.
Mimosa lepidota Herzog, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 7: 53.
1909.-"Bolivia: Im Leguminosenwald der Cuesta del Seringal (prov. Vallegrande), ca. 1700 m, Dezember 1907 [fr], Herzog no. 717."-Holotypus, +B = F Neg. 14181; clastotypus (fi-agm), F! M. lepidota sensu Herzog, Meded.
Rijks-Herb. 27: 33.
1915.
Slenderly branched microphyllidious shrubs attaining 2-2.5 m, with bluntly ribbed fuscous branchlets, appearing glabrous but the young Stems, lf-stks and Ift-margins microscopically pubemlent, the bright green concolorous foliage resinously viscid, the If-axes and dorsal face of lfts with lentiform or immersed excretory glands, the globose capitula solitary and geminate in distal If-axils on peduncle ± as long as subtending If.
Stipules firm green, lance-ovate 1.5-3 mm, both reflexed and revolute on themselves, becoming firm fuscous, long persisting.
Leaf-stalks 2.5-5 cm, the petiole 6-13 x 0.4-0.6 mm, the intervals between successive pinnae along each side of If-stk 2.5-4.5 mm, the ventral sulcus continuous (spicules 0); pinnae (5-)6-10-jug., the pairs seldom exactly opposite, accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 14-21 mm, its interfoliolar segments 1-1.8(-2.1) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 11-16(-l 7)-jug., alternate along rachis, the first 1ft 0.3-1 mm distant from broadly ovate obtuse or apiculate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.4 mm, the blades ovate-elliptic obtuse from obliquely tmncate base, sessile against pinna-rachis, the longer ones 1.6-2.6(-3) x 0.8-1.3(-1.6) mm, ± twice as long as wide, all essentially veinless externally.
Peduncles at anthesis very slender 1.5- 3 cm; capitula without filaments 5-5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds resinous and pubemlent; bracts linear-oblanceolate ±1.5 X 0.2 mm, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, all or almost all bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 1.2-1.4 mm, the depresseddeltate teeth scarcely 0.1 mm; corolla vase-shaped 2.5-6 mm, the membranous ovate 1-nerved, almost plane lobes 0.7-1 x 0.8 mm; filaments white, obscurely connate into a stemonozone below ovary, exserted 3.5-6 mm.
Pod not seen, but described (ex char.) as shortly stipitate, the body linear in outline, slightly contracted between seeds, ±4 cm long, 6-7-seeded, the articles 4 mm long, on each face of pod alternately depressed and coUiculate.
In submontane scmb woodland, 1800-2350 m, valleys of the Bolivian Andes draining to Rio Grande in lat. ±18°-19°S in deptos.
Sta. Cmz and Chuquisaca (Samaipata, Tarbuco, PadiUa, Vallegrande).-Fl.
VIII-I(-?), fr.
XII-III(-?).
Mimosa lepidota closely resembles distantly allopatric M. bifurca in resinous foliage and tiny alternate leaflets, and particularly M. bifurca var. desmanthoides in cochleately distorted stipules, but it differs from the latter in more numerous and shorter pinnae, in slightly fewer leaflets (to 11-17, not 15-30 pairs), in longer peduncles (15- 30, not 3-20 mm), in absolutely and in proportion to the corolla longer calyx (1.2-1.4, not 0.5- 1.1 mm), and in tropical-montane habitat in the Bolivian Andes.
159.
Mimosa glycyrrhizoides Bameby, sp. nov., foUolis parvis dorso glanduloso-vermculosis altematim secus pinnamm rachin insertis inter ser. Stipellares M. ^z/wrc<2^ manifeste proxima, sed caulibus petiolisque hinc inde aculeis rectis validis armatis necnon legumine undique setis stramineis glanduloso-capitatis eglandulosisque immixtis l~^ mm longis hispidissimo diversa.—Brazil.
Parana: Mun.
Palmas, estrada Palmas-Mangueirinha, 14.
XII.1966 (fr), G. Hatschbach 15480.-holotypus, MBM 7765; isotypi, HBG, P, RB, US. Slender, openly branched microphyllidious shrubs 10-15 dm, randomly armed on infrastipular ribs of stem, near and well below nodes, and on back of some lf-stks with erect, straight or distally retro-arcuate, broad-based stramineous aculei 1-6.5 mm, the young growth thinly glandular-verruculose and minutely pubemlent, the foliage concolorous, the thick-textured olivaceous lfts glabrous facially, gland-dotted dorsally, minutely ciliolate, the globose capitula axillary, the fmits lateral below new leafy growth.
Stipules ascending or sometimes reflexed (but not involute) in age, ovate or elliptic-ovate obtuse 0.7-1.5 X 0.7-1 mm, persistent.
Leafstalks (1.5-)2-4.5 cm, the petiole (6-)7-16 x 0.6-0.8 mm, the longer interpinnal segments (4-)5-10 mm, the pinnae seldom exactly opposite, the ventral sulcus continuous between them; pinnae 2-5-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair (1.6-)2-3 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-1.7 mm; lfts of distal pinnae (14-)16- 20(-2 l)-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.7-1.2 mm distant from ovate-suborbicular or reniform green paraphyllidia 0.3-0.6 X 0.3-0.7 mm, the blades rhombic-oblong or eUiptic from deltately auriculate base, obtuse at apex, those near mid-rachis (1.5-) 1.7-3.3 x 0.8- 1.5 mm, ±2-2.6 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath weakly 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib a little forwardly displaced, straight or almost so, the posterior nerve(s) expiring within the plane margin.
Peduncles solitary and 2-3 together 6-13 mm, divaricate in fmit; capitula globose, without filaments ±4.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the receptacle 1.5-2 X 0.8-1.2 mm; bracts 1.5-2 x 0.4-0.6 mm, deciduous; calyx campanulate 0.7- 0.8 mm, shallowly deltate-denticulate, minutely pubemlent extemally; corolla narrowly campanulate ±2-2.2 mm, the ovate 1-nerved, shallowly concave lobes 0.5-0.7 x 0.5-0.6 mm, minutely pubemlent and viscid-villosulous dorsally; filaments (presumably pink) free to base, exserted 2-2.5 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, in profile undulately linear, gradually contracted at base into a stipe 1.5-4 mm, cuspidate at apex, when weU fertilized 20-35 x 3-4 mm, 3-8-seeded, the constricted replum 0.35-0.6 mm diam., together with papery valves hispid overall with straight erect compressed stramineous, partly plain and partly gland-tipped setae 1-4 mm, the valves finally breaking up into elliptic or oblong-eUiptic, free-falling, individually dehiscent articles (3.5-)4-6 mm long; seeds basipetal, compressedobovoid ±3 X 2.2 mm, the golden-brown testa smooth sublustrous.
At edge of campo or in thickets, apparently local, near 1000 m in upper basin of rio Igua9u in s.-centr. Parana (mun. Guarapuava and Palmas, lat. ±25°-26°30'S), and at ±400 m in basin of rio Ibicui in w. Rio Grande do Sul (near 29°30'S), in extratropical BrazU.-R. IX-X(-?), fr.
X-XIL Mimosa glycyrrhizoides might rationally be interpreted as an armed variant of M. bifurca, with which it agrees in leaf-formula and especially in gland-dotted leaflets arising alternately along the pinna-rachis.
It differs, however, not merely in aculeate stems and leaf-stalks but also in the densely hispid and glandular-hispid, elongately burrlike pods, strikingly different from the smooth, merely resin-spotted pod characteristic of all known forms of M. bifurca.
The coincidence of glandular-verruculose foliage with a hispid pod recaUing that of Glycyrrhiza lepidota Nutt. suggested the epithet.
160.
Mimosa intricata Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 407.
1842.-"BrazU, 5^//a"-Holotypus, collected, teste Malme, 1931: 13: "inter Porto Alegre et Encmzilhada, Rio Grande do Sul.", K (herb.
Hook.)!; presumed isotypi, Sello 2871, +B = F Neg. 1331\ Sello s.n.,
P! M. intricata sensu Bentham, 1875: 430, 1876: 366.
Intricately branched microphyllidious subshrubs 4(-?) dm, armed on most intemodes with stout broad-based recurved aculei l-^ mm, microscopically puberulent throughout but lacking gland-tipped setulae, the very small concolorous thick-textured lfts charged dorsally with a few impressed glands scarcely 0.1 mm diam., the numerous small globose capitula 1-3 together in Ifaxils of all branchlets, each surpassing its subtending If, together forming an effuse but stiff", openly foliate panicle.
Stipules recurved deltate 0.3-0.5 mm, tardily deciduous.
Leafstalks 8-18 mm, the petiole 3-6 x 0.3-0.5 mm, the ventral groove continuous between pinna-pairs (spicules 0), the interpinnal segments 1.5-3 mm; pinnae (3-)4-5(-6)-jug., never exactly opposite and sometimes of odd number, a little accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 5-8.5 mm, the interval between successive lfts on each side of pinna 0.3-0.7 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 8-13- jug. but the pairs alternate along rachis, slightly decrescent proximally, the first pair 0.2-0.6 mm distant from suborbicular paraphyllidia 0.2-0.3 mm, the blades all sessile against rachis, ellipticobovate from deeply auriculate base, obtuse at apex, the largest 1-1.4 x 0.4-0.8 mm, all veinless on both faces, cmmpled-mgulose when dry.
Peduncles 11-17 mm; capitula without filaments 4-4.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds microscopically pubemlent; bracts oblanceolate obtuse 0.5-0.7 mm, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx campanulate subtmncate 0.6 mm; corolla narrowly turbinate ±2.2 mm, the almost plane ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.8 x 0.6 mm, slightly thickened at tip; fllaments free to base, exserted ±2(-?) mm; ovary glabrous; pod unknown.
In unrecorded habitat but to be expected in stony campo, described here from parts of the type-collection said by Malme (I.e.) to have been collected on the Atlantic slope of Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU in lat. ±30°-30°30'S.-n. season unknown.
Mimosa intricata appears to be closely akin to M. bifurca, with which it agrees in alternate leaflets charged dorsally with impressed glands; but it differs in armature of the intemodes and in the extremely small leaves composed of shorter pinnae (rachis 5-8.5, not 20-90 mm long).
Mimosa hatschbachii is superficially similar in aculeate stems and diminutive foliage, but has stems viscid with stalked glands, opposite leaflets, and filaments united at base into a tube.
161.
Mimosa strobiliflora Burkart, Darwiniana 7(4): 519, fig. 3.
1947.-"BrasU.
Estado Parana: Porto Amazonas, ad ripam flum.
Rio Iguassu, leg. P. Dusen No. 15.157, lO.VI.
1914."-Holotypus, S!; isotypi, BM! F! GH! MICH! NY! S (3 sheets)! Unarmed shrubs of unknown stature, glabrous except for residually ciliolate stipules, ventrally puberulent pinna-rachises and ciliolate floral bracts, the terete, lustrously glutinous purplishbrown, paniculately branched homotinous stems together with olivaceous concolorous thick-textured lfts and axillary peduncles all densely charged overall with impressed or immersed resin-exuding glands, the subglobose capitula involucrate by dilated bracts.
Stipules erect or in age declined, foliaceous, broadly ovate-subcordate or semicircular, obtuse or subapiculate, ±2.5 mm long and wide, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (3-)4- 7 cm, the petiole 10-32 x 0.5-0.8 mm, the interpinnal segments 7-14 mm, the shallow narrow ventral sulcus obscurely bridged between pinnae but espiculate; pinnae (2-)3-5-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 2.5- 4 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.8-2.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 12-15-jug., decidedly alternate or in some lvs subopposite along rachis, the first 1ft ±0.5 mm distant from broadly ovatesubcordate paraphyllidia 0.4-0.9 mm, the blades oblong-obovate or -elliptic from semicordate base, obtuse or subtmncate at apex, the longer ones 4-8 x 1.8-3.8 mm, 2.1-2.4 times as long as wide, the margin distally crenulate by impressed glands, the dorsal face faintly 1-4-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric, all nerves discolored but fully immersed.
Peduncles solitary and geminate toward the end of leafy branchlets, 2.5-4.2 cm; capitula without filaments 8-9.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike, the 2-3 outermost bracts not subtending a fl, subfoliaceous and ±4 mm long and as wide or wider, bluntly 2-3-lobed; interfloral bracts oblanceolate obtuse 3.5-5 X 0.9-1.3 mm, finely ciliolate with white hairs ±0.5 mm, persistent; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx campanulate glabrous 0.5-0.6 mm, the rim obscurely lobulate; corolla funnelform 3.5-4 mm, the membranous, shallowly concave, 1- or obscurely 3-nerved lobes ±1 X 0.75 mm, extemally pubemlent and glandular-setulose; filaments presumably pink, free essentially to base, exserted ±4.5 mm; ovary glandular; pod unknown.
In unrecorded microhabitat near 750 m, known only from banks of upper rio Igua?u at ±49°50'W in s.-e. Parana, Brazil.-Fl.
VI-VII(-?).
A remarkable mimosa, resembling M. paraguariae in habit and M. bifurca in glutinous foliage and alternate leaflets, but strikingly different from both in conelike capitula involucrate by two or more broad, bluntly toothed subfoliaceous bracts.
162.
Mimosa barnebiana Fortunato & Tressens, Candollea 44: 35, fig. 1.
1989.-"Argentina.
Prov. Corrientes: 'Depto.
Ituzaing6, Isla Apipe Grande, Panco Cue .
.
.
5.
X.1978, A. Schinini & R. Vanni 15802 '"-Holotypus, CTES, seen in photo!; isotypus, NY! [also, but not seen, at BAB, G, K, LIL, MO, SI].
Shrubs 2-3 m, armed on lf-stks with scattered, subacroscopic aculei 2-5(-8) mm, the young branchlets and foliage densely glandular-setulose, the fls loosely subracemose on short axillary peduncles.
Stipules ovate 1.5-2.5 mm.
Leaf formula ±iv-vi/20-32, the lf-stks to 7.5 cm, the rachis of distal pinnae to 3.5 cm, the paraphyllidia ovate ±0.5 x 0.5 mm, the lfts either alternate or subopposite along rachis, narrowly oblong obtuse ±3-5(-5.5) mm.
Peduncle and spike-axis together 5-8 cm; pedicels to 0.3 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, glabrous or almost so, the lower ones staminate, the campanulate calyx 0.5 mm, the turbinate corolla ±2.2 mm, its broadly ovate lobes nearly half as long; fertilized ovary densely glandular-setulose.
Craspedium 20-40 x 3-5 mm, the replum 0.5 mm wide, the valves glabrous, glandular, the 3-7(-8) almost square articles 4-6 mm long. In flooded campo of islands in the Parana river on both sides of the Paraguay-Argentina boundary downstream from Posadas, between 56° and 57°W.-n. X-I. Mimosa barnebiana presents the unforeseen combination of indumentum and dilated paraphyllidia proper to ser. Stipellares with loose amentiform units of inflorescence unique in the series.
A parallel development is M. chacoensis in sect. Habbasia ser. Rojasianae.
B(xviii).
Series A U R I C U L A T A E Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Auriculatae Barneby, ser. nov. monotypica, hucusque cum dubio ser. Stipellaribus relata, sed vix nisi paraphyUidiis dilatatis cum ea comparabilis, inter mimosas diplostemoneas omnes stipulis maximis foliaceis, pinnis conjugato-pinnatis, foliolisque majusculis luridis glaucescentibus praestans.—Sp. unica: M. auriculata Bentham.
Unarmed macrophyllidious shrubs.
Pubescence scanty, of gland-tipped setulae.
Stipules foliaceous, striately many-nerved.
Leaf-formula i/8-12; terminal appendage of If-stk subfoliaceous; interpinnal spicule 0; paraphyllidia dilated.
Capitula subglobose; flowers sessile, 4-merous 8-androus; calyx campanulate subtmncate ±0.6 mm; corolla ±3.3 mm, the lobes 1-nerved; filaments monadelphous through ± 1 mm.
Pods shortly stipitate, in profile broad-linear 6.5-8.5 mm wide, the replum slender, the valves disarticulating.
Sp.
1, very local on upland campo in s.-e. Bolivia.
While Bentham provisionally referred M. auriculata to ser. Stipellares, no doubt on account of the foliaceous paraphyllidia, he admitted that it was not closely related to any mimosa then known, and nothing has tumed up since to link it positively with any defined group in the genus.
Dilated stipules occur in some Asperatae and Pachycarpae, but all such have plurijugate microphyll leaves, the former also spiculate leafstalks, and the latter a turgid, valvately dehiscent pod with broad replum.
No true Stipellares have enlarged, striately venulose stipules or conjugate pinnae, and none bear any gross resemblance to M. auriculata.
There is no alternative to removing this remarkable species to a monotypic series.
163.
Mimosa auriculata Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 430.
1875.—"Santiago, prov. Chiquitos in Bolivia, D'Orbigny, n. 877."
— Holotypus, P! = NY Neg. 11817; isotypi, F (fragm)! G! M! M. grandistipula Herzog, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 7: 53.
1909.-"Bolivia: auf einem Hochkamp des Cerro de Santiago (Prov. Chiquitos), ca. 800 m .
.
.
Mai 1907.
Herzog no. 481."-Holotypus, Z! = NY Neg. 11889.
Unarmed shrubs 1-1.5 m with few widespreading branches, the stem-internodes, peduncles and margin of some young lfts charged with erect gland-tipped setulae 0.1-0.25 mm, otherwise glabrous, the thick-textured lvs and foliaceous stipules glaucescent but brown or black when dry, the subglobose capitula single in lateral and terminal efoliate but amply bracteate pseudoracemes both immersed in and emergent to 2 dm from foliage.
Stipules erect-ascending or deflexed, amplexicaul, semicircular or broadly ovate 7-12 x 7-17 mm, striately many-nerved from base, persistent.
Leafstalks 2.5-4 cm, at middle 0.6-1.5 mm diam., narrowly grooved ventrally, the terminal seta foliaceous linear-oblanceolate 4-6 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 5.5- 9 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 5-9 mm; lfts 8-12-jug., commonly a little decrescent proximally, the small first pair 1.5-2.5 mm distant from obovate-suborbicular paraphyllidia ±1-3 X 1-2 mm, the blades amply oblong-obovate from deeply widely semicordate base, broadly rounded and often shallowly emarginate at apex, the larger ones 17-24 x 7-13 mm, 1.9-2.4 times as long as wide, all 5-9-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib pinnately 3-7-branched on each side from near middle upward, the primary nerve on each side of it produced well beyond mid-blade, the outer ones much shorter, the secondary venules brochidodrome within the plane margin, the whole venation immersed or scarcely perceptible above, sharply raised beneath.
Peduncles widely ascending 2.5-4.5 cm; capitula without filaments 7-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts obovate or narrowly oblanceolate obtuse 2-3 mm, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus glabrous; calyx campanulate subtmncate 0.6-0.7 mm; corollas pale purplish, narrowly turbinate ±3.3 mm, the erect plane ovate 1-nerved lobes 1.5-1.6 x 1 mm; filaments fused with each other and with corollatube into a stemonozone 1-1.3 mm long, the 4 longer ones exserted ± 6 mm; ovary substipitate glabrous.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, in profile Unear-oblong, cuneately contracted at base into a stipe 1.5-3 mm, when well fertilized 30-45 x 6.5-8.5 mm and 5-9-seeded, the shallowly undulate-constricted, minutely glandular-setulose replum 0.5-0.6 mm wide, the glabrous veinless nigrescent valves low-colliculate over each seed, becoming stiffly papery and breaking into freefalling, tardily dehiscent articles 5-6 mm long; seeds subhorizontal on filiform funicle, not seen fully ripe.
In unknown microhabitats but to be sought in stony campo near 800 m, apparently endemic to Cordillera de Santiago in prov. Chiquitos, depto. Santa Cmz, BoUvia.—Fl.
V(-?).
B(xix).
Series CAESALPINIIFOLIAE Bentham Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Caesalpiniifoliae Bentham.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Caesalpiniifoliae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 392.
1842. —Sp. lectotypica: M. caesalpiniifolia Bentham.
Either armed or unarmed macrophyllidious shrubs and trees, usually laticiferous.
Indumentum of short plain hairs and granules, eglandular.
Stipules 1-several-nerved.
Leaf formula ii-iv/l- 4(-5), the larger lfts ± 2-5 x 1.5-4 cm, the blades of all shallowly crenulate-margined, the secondary venules arising from midrib and from the inner posterior primary vein anastomosing with the marginal nerve.
Flowers either spicate or capitulate, 3-merous 6-androus, the filaments white.
Fruit a stipitate, linear or linear-oblong, planocompressed, 6-10-seeded craspedium 1-1.5 cm wide.
Spp. 2, native to extra-Amazonian Brazil, from Maranhao to Pemambuco, s. to Mato Grosso and Minas Gerais, cultivated and subspontaneous in Amazonian and s.-e. Brazil, and occasionally seen in botanical gardens.
The Caesalpiniifoliae appear closely related on the one hand to the macrophyllidious Leiocarpae, and on the other to the trimerous Ceratoniae, but differ from both in the craspedodrome venulation of the leaffets with a shaUowly crenate marginal nerve.
Similar venulation has arisen in the Mexican M. (Leucaenoideae) martin-delcampoi and in sect. Mimosa ser. Sensitivae, but nowhere else in the genus.
Bentham at first associated Af. caesalpiniifolia y^ithM. (Leiocarpae) sericantha in an independent series, but he afterwards transferred each to a separate group of so-called Leptostachyae.
Due to its capitellate units of inflorescence, ample leaflets and trimerous white flowers, M. laticifera (as M. obovata Bentham, non Roxburgh) has been associated with M. ceratonia, but this is a non-laticiferous scandent shmb with serial prickles and conventional camptodrome venulation of leaflets.
Conspectus of ser. Caesalpiniifoliae Mimosa * Fls spicate; lf-formula ii-iv/2-5.
164. caesalpiniifolia Bentham ** Fls capitate; lf-formula ii-iv/1 (-2).
165. laticifera Rizzini & Mattos Filho Key to species of ser. Caesalpiniifoliae 1.
Fls spicate, the spikes without filaments 20-75 x 4-5 mm; stipules 5-7-nerved; lfts of longer pinnae 2-4-jug., those of distal pinnae only rarely 2-jug.; pod ±9-11 mm wide; native in n.-e. BrazU beyond limit of cerrado climax vegetation, but planted within the range of the next and elsewhere 164.
M. caesalpiniifolia (p. 256).
1.
Rs capitate, the capitula without filaments 4.5-5.5 mm diam.; stipules 1-nerved; lfts of most pinnae 1-jug., of distal pinnae of occasional lvs 2-jug.; pod 12-16.5 mm wide; native in cerrado climax on the Brazilian Planalto, rarely planted elsewhere 165.
M laticifera (p. 257).
164.
Mimosa caesalpiniifolia Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 392 (''caesalpiniaefolid").
1841.- "[Brazil] Prov. Piauhy, Gardner, «.
2131," the locality particularized in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 360, t. 89.
1875: "circa Oeiras .
.
. frequens."
—Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)!,
2 sheets: fl. = IPA Neg. 1281 = NY Neg. 1861; and fr.,
s.n. = IPA Neg. 1282; isotypi, BM! F! = F Neg. 54814, G! GH! K (hb. Benth.)! NY! P! US! W! M. caesalpiniaefolia sensu Bentham, 1876: 416; Morim de Lima, 1985, photo 18; Lewis, 1987,fig.8B. M. punctulata sensu Glaziou, 1906: 180 (9771).
Amply leafy trees or potentially sarmentose shrubs 3-7 m, sometimes (? always) laticiferous, either armed or not on random intemodes or rarely on dorsal rib of some lf-stks with stout erect or recurved broad-based, stramineous or brownish aculei to 3-8 mm, the sulcate homotinous stems, lf-stks ventrally, and all axes of inflorescence rather thinly pilosulous with weak spreading whitish hairs to 0.25-0.5 mm, the lfstks in addition minutely granular, the broad papery olivaceous but bmnnescent bicolored lfts either dull or sublustrous above, paler dull beneath, either quite glabrous, or minutely ciliolate, or barbellate dorsally in axils of primary nerves, the pseudoracemes of amentiform flspikes either largely axillary to coetaneous lvs or forming a few-branched leafless panicle exserted 1-3 dm from foliage.
Stipules lanceolate or linear-attenuate (2.5-)3-8 X 0.6-1.5 mm, early papery brownish, 5-7-nerved, deciduous or subpersistent.
Leaf-stalks including livid wrinkled pulvinus 4.5-10.5 cm, the petiole 1.5-4.5 cm, at middle 0.8-1.5 mm diam., the interpetiolar segments 1.5-3(-3.5) cm, the ventral groove bridged between pinnae but spicules 0; pinnae 2-4-jug., commonly 2-3-, rarely all 2-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of distal pair 3-6.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments and that between first pair and subulate paraphyllidia (5-)7-20 mm; lfts of proximal pinnae 2-3-, of distal pinnae 3-4(5)- jug, accrescent distally, in outline obliquely obovate, oblong-obovate or broadly elliptic, obtuse or minutely callous-mucronulate, the shallowly crenate margin girdled by a pallid nerve, the distal pair (20-)26-46 x (12-) 15-36 mm, aU 3-nerved from pulvinus, the forward-arched costa and the proximal primary nerve pinnately branched and the secondary venules anastomosing with the marginal nerve, these and a delicate venulation of third and fourth orders raised on both faces but more emphatically so beneath.
Axis of fl-spikes including short peduncle 3-7(- 9) cm, the fls subcontiguous, the spike without filaments 4-5 mm diam.; bracts linear-oblanceolate or -spatulate 0.5-1.1 mm caducous;y7c>wers 3-merous 6-androus, mostly bisexual, the buds obovoid obtuse glabrous; calyx membranous glabrous 0.4-0.7 mm, the low-deltate teeth 0.1-0.2 mm; corolla turbinate 1.7-2.2 mm, the ovate greenish-white lobes 1-1.3 x 0.6-1 mm, simply 1-nerved or incipiently pinnate-nerved; filaments white, free to base, exserted to (4-)4.5-7 mm; ovary pilosulous on faces, the keels glabrous.
Pods stipitate, the stipe 4-7 mm, the broadlinear planocompressed body 60-75 X 9-11mm, the almost straight replum 0.5-0.7 mm wide, the brown glabrous, minutely granular, delicately venulose valves becoming papery, separating from replum and breaking up into ±7-10 rectangular or almost square articles 7-9 mm long; seeds (few seen) compressed, in broad profile obtusely rectangular ±5.5 x 4 mm, the testa smooth brown sublustrous, the pleurogram only 1-1.2 mm diam. Native on creek banks and at edge of gallery forest at low elevations in n.-e. Brazil, from Maranhao to Pemambuco; cultivated and subspontaneous in centr. and lower Amazon valley (Manaus; Belem), near Ilheus, Bahia, at Rio de Janeiro in Jardim Botanico and Resende, and in suburban BrasUia, D. F.; also in tropical Africa (Cote d'lvoire, Ake Assi 11299, K).
Fl. irregularly through the year.—Sabid; unha de gata (or de gato); jupinuan.
Map 6.
165.
Mimosa laticifera Rizzini & Mattos Filho, Simp6sio sobre o cerrado 171 + fig. [Reimpressao 1971: 147].
1963.-".
.
. ad Joao Pinheiro (Minas Gerais) .
.
.
Rizzini 6.
III.1962 .
.
.
RB 774.629."-Holotypus, RB (3 sheets)!; paratypi, Duarte 7397.
Macedo 437, NY! M. obovata Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 394.
1842, nom. illeg.—"Brazil, Pohl."
, the locality specified in Martius, R. bras. 15(2): 363.
1876: "Francisco Oliveiro [=between Oliveira and Rancho Francisco de Paula, ±20''40'S, 44''55'W, in s.-centr. Minas Gerais]."-Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1868 = IPA Neg. 1284; isotypi, K (hb. Benth.)! M! NY! W!—Non M. obovata Roxburgh [Hort. bengal.
93.
1814, nomen nudum], R. ind. ed. 1832,2:461.
1832.
M. obovata sensu Bentham, 1875: 422, 1876: 363, tantum ex parte; Bameby, 1985a: 86.
M. laticifera sensu Rizzini & Mattos Filho, Arq. Jard.
Bot. Rio de Janeiro 18: 73-85, fotos 1-11.
1965.
Amply macrophyllidious round-headed trees and bushy treelets of cerrado and cerradao, at anthesis 3-7 m, with furrowed corky tmnk to 1 dm diam. and spreading or drooping branches exuding when cut a milky latex, the smooth brown, atrocastaneous or vertically striped branchlets and lf-stks erraticaUy armed with stout recurved aculei 1.5-6 mm (but many specimens thornless), the new growth appearing glabrous but the axes of inflorescence and some lf-stks minutely pubemlent and granular, and the lfts commonly but not always barbellate beneath in axils of primary veins, the broad, stiffly papery venulose Ifts bicolored, when dry dark olivaceous bmnnescent, paler beneath, undulately nerve-marginate, the pyramidal panicle of small white globose capitula either leafless or proximally leafy-bracteate, exserted 1-3 dm from foliage.
Stipules firm brown lustrous, deltate or triangular-subulate l-2.5(-3) mm, bluntly 1-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 5.5-12.5 cm, the openly shallow-sulcate or merely depressed petiole 2.5-3.5(-4) cm, at middle 0.8-1.6 mm diam., the interpinnal segments (1.5-)2-3.5 cm; spicules 0; pinnae 2-4-jug., subequilong, the slender rachis of 2-foliolate ones 12-25 mm, of rare 4-foliolate ones to 40-45 mm; lfts of most pinnae 1-, or of occasional distal ones 2-jug., the pulvinule 1.5-2.8 mm, the broadly obliquely obovate or suborbicular blade (20-)25-52 x (17-)20-42 mm, at base rounded or subcordate on proximal side and cuneate on distal one, broadly obtuse at apex, 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the distally incurved or almost straight costa pinnately 4-6-branched, the posterior primary nerve V3-V2 as long, the anterior primary one weaker and shorter, the secondary venules anastomosing with a fine marginal nerve, aU these together with 2-4-nary reticular venules on upper face immersed or weaidy prominulous but differentiated by yellowish color, beneath more sharply elevated.
Peduncles solitary or fasciculate by 2-4, 5-13(-15) mm, 1-2-bracteolate; capitula globose, without filaments 4.5-5.5 mm diam.; bracts brown, narrowly spatulate 0.6-0.9 mm; flowers 3-merous 6-androus, many or all of a capitulum functionally male; calyx campanulate brownish 0.6-0.9 mm, the undulately subtmncate rim sometimes minutely ciliolate; corolla white fragrant 2.1-2.8 mm, the ovate 1 -nerved, apically callous but not incurved lobes 1.2-1.5 X 0.8-1.1 mm; filaments white, sometimes very shortly connate at base, the longer ones exserted 4-5 mm; ovary glabrous, shortstipitate.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, in profile broadly linear planocompressed, when well fertilized 60-90 X 12-15(-16.5) mm, contracted at base into a stipe 7-12 mm, at apex abmptly apiculate, the replum except where ovules abort straight or almost so, in dorsal view 0.9-1.3 mm wide, the papery yellowish or purplish-brown, finely venulose glabrous, ultimately lustrous valves low-convex over each seed, tardily separating from replum and breaking up into (6-)7- 9 oblong articles (7-)8-l 1 mm long; seeds discoid ±6.5-7.5 X 5 mm, the testa smooth brown, the C-shaped pleurogram 2-2.5 mm diam. In cerrado and cerradao, commonly on finetextured red soils, 350-700 m, intermptedly widespread over the Brazilian Planalto: headwaters of rios Araguaia and dos Mortes in e. Mato Grosso; upper Parana-Paranaiba basin from s. Mato Grosso do Sul e. through the Triangulo of Minas Gerais and extreme n. S. Paulo, in lat. 18-2rS, to the sources of rio S. Francisco; cultivated at 950 m in Distrito Federal (Brasilia and environs).-n. II-V; fr.
IV-X.-Quebra-foice; vinhdtico de espinho; pau de espinho.
Map 6.
In Flora brasiliensis Bentham confounded, under the name M. obovata, two species superficially similar in leaf-formula: a corky-barked laticiferous tree of the cerrado to which the name M. obovata was originally applied, and a prickly liana of wet coastal forest described herein under the name M. ceratonia var. pseudo-obovata.
Rizzini & Mattos Filho capably and in great detail differentiated between the two, but having mistakenly applied the epithet obovata to the coastal liana were obliged to redescribe the genuine M. obovata as M. laticifera.
The situation was clarified in a recent paper (Bameby, 1985a, I.e.).
I have since learned that M. obovata Bentham is a posterior homonym which must give way after all to M. laticifera Rizzini and Mattos Filho.
A record of M. laticifera from Ceara (Sa. da Baturite, Bro.
Jose Eugenio 582, RB, not mapped) requires confirmation.
B(xx).
Series CERATONIAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Ceratoniae Barneby, ser. nov. e Rubicaulibus excerpta, his signis recognitae: fmtices saepissime sarmentosae; foliola pauca majuscula 1-6-juga, saltem 1 cm longa et longiora; flores 3-meri 6-andri; legumina 1-2 mm lata, valvulis maturis haud articulatis.—Sp. typica: JM. ceratonia L. M. sect. Habbasia ser. Rubicaules sensu Bentham, 1875: 422, minima ex parte (sp. 181).
Sarmentose or exceptionaUy (Af. carvalhoi) free-standing shrubs, mostly armed on both stems and lf-stks (in M. carvalhoi on lf-stks only) with scattered cat's claw aculei.
Indumentum of small plain hairs and granular trichomes, eglandular, sometimes almost 0.
Stipules triangular-subulate or lance-setiform 1-nerved.
Leaf-formvXa i-v/1- 6, the longer lfts (10-)11-24(-30) x 6-19(-22) mm.
Inflorescence either an efoliate panicle or largely immersed in foliage, the capitula globose or ellipsoid; flowers 3-merous 6-androus; calyx campanulate 0.3-0.9 mm, the orifice low-denticulate or subtruncate; corolla 1.8-2.8 mm; filaments white or ochroleucous but in M. brachystachya pink, free or nearly so.
Pods (of M. brachystachya unknown) oblong or broad-linear narrow craspedia, or in the single case of M. 1-2 cm wide, the valves separating entire from hexandra in a suberous pseudo-loment.
The also replum; seeds 6-8(-9). trimerous ser. Filipedes, characterized like BiSpp. four, of Atlantic slope and coast of e. mucronatae by narrow craspedia, are slender, Brazil, from Pemambuco to Sta. Catarina, one herbaceous or weakly subshrubby plants rarely represented by a variety in the West Indies. attaining one meter in stature, and agree well This small group segregated from the heterowith Ceratoniae except in the fmit.
They could geneous ser. Rubicaules Bentham takes form represent a specialized off*-shoot of Ceratoniae, around the nucleus of M. ceratonia, and is here to which they are connected by ser. Campicolae, defined to include only species unequivocally reor are perhaps better interpreted as Paucifoliatae lated.
The ser. Bimucronatae contains some spewith reduced ffowers.
Old World mimosas that cies that resemble Ceratoniae in trimerous flowresemble Ceratoniae in habit, armament and ers, but they are stiflly branched shmbs and broad pods are all tetramerous. treelets different in habit, in armament, and in Conspectus of ser. Ceratoniae Mimosa * Sarmentose; fls white or cream.
166. ceratonia Linnaeus a. var. pseudo-obovata (Taubert) Bameby b. var. interior Bameby c. var. ceratonia 167. medioxima Bameby ** Free-standing; fls white or cream.
168. carvalhoi Bameby *** Sarmentose; fls pink.
169. brachystachya Taubert Key to species of ser. Ceratoniae 1.
Capitula globose; fls white or ochroleucous.
2.
Sarmentose shrubs, often high-climbing, the stems and lf-stks aculeate.
3.
Lf-formula ii-iv(-v)/2-3; Atlantic Brazil and West Indies 166.
M ceratonia (p. 259).
3.
Lf-formula i-ii/2-3; Bahia, Brazil 167.
M. medioxima (p. 262).
2.
Free-standing shmbs, the stems smooth, only the lf-stks aculeate; lf-formula (i-)iii/l(-2); littoral of n. Bahia, Brazil 168.
M carvalhoi (p. 263).
1.
Capitula ellipsoid; fls pink.
Minas Gerais, Brazil 169.
M. brachystachya (p. 263).
166.
Mimosa ceratonia Linnaeus, Sp. pi. 523. sidually ciliolate or even thinly pilosulous, the 1753.—Typus infra sub var. ceratonia indiinflorescence usually a succession of pseudoracatur. cemes or a pyramidal panicle of small globose capitula, these exserted 1-4 dm beyond foliage, Macrophyllidious sarmentose shrubs potenthe peduncles rarely all axillary.
Stipules lineartially attaining 6 m but when lacking support lanceolate or subulate (1.5-)2-5.5 x 0.6-1 mm, forming diffiise tangled thickets, either thinly ertardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks (4-)6-l 2(-l 4) cm, ratically or densely armed with recurved aculei the petiole 2-4.5(-6) cm, at middle (0.6-)0.8-1.4 0.5-2.5 mm, either glabrous throughout or the mm diam., the shallow open ventral groove simlivid homotinous stems together with most Ifply bridged between pinna-pairs or the bridge and infforescence-axes thinly pilosulous with seldom with a small spicule, the interpinnal segspreading whitish or sordid/z<2/r5 to 0.15-0.4 mm ments mostly (1.2-)1.5-3(-3.3) cm; pinnae comoften mixed with minute livid granules, the plane monly 3-4(-5)-jug, of some small distal lvs 2-jug. or marginally subrevolute lfts bicolored, dull oU- (no further described), in var. interior all 2(-3)- vaceous above, beneath paler and at times rejug, the rachis 1.5-4 cm, the segments between pairs of lfts and between first pair and the minute subulate paraphyllidia 7-15 mm; lfts of all pinnae commonly 3-, or of some 4-5-jug., less often of all or of the proximal pair alone 2-jug., in any case a little distally accrescent, the blades obliquely obovate obtuse or emarginate (10-) 12- 16(-30) X (7-)9-19(-22) mm, at base rounded or shallowly cordate on proximal side and cuneate on distal one, (3-)4-6-nerved from pulvinule, the straight midrib excentric, the primary nerves aU expiring or weakly brochidodrome well within margin, the strong inner posterior nerve ascending nearly to blade apex, all prominulous beneath only and giving rise to faint open reticular venulation.
Peduncles 2-5 per node, 7-16 (-25) mm, either aculeate or unarmed; capitula without filaments (4-)4.5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts 0.6-0.9 x 0.3-0.6 mm; flowers all or almost all 3-merous 6-androus, the buds obovoid, glabrous or minutely papillate at tip; calyx campanulate 0.55-0.9 mm, the lowdeltate teeth 0.1-0.15 mm, glabrous or minutely ciliolate; corolla cream-white or pink-tipped, vase-shaped 1.9-2.7 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.8-1.2 mm, toward apex callous and shallowly hooded; filaments white or cream-colored, free, the longer set exserted 5.5-7.3 mm; ovary either glabrous or marginally pilosulous and glandular on faces.
Pods mostly 1-3 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong, commonly a little decurved (35-)40-60 x (10-)12-19(-20)mm, at apex broadly obtusely apiculate, the shallowly undulate replum 0.65-1 mm wide, armed with 1-3 files of stout, backwardly curved aculei to 1.5-2.5 mm, the stiffly papery green or commonly brownor red-tinged, ultimately dark brown or blackish valves low-coUiculate over each of 6-8(-9) seeds, when ripe separating entire from replum, inertly dehiscent; seeds in broad profile ± 5-8 X 3-5 mm, the testa lustrous black.
A syndrome of armed stems, trimerous flower with white filaments, and a broad planocompressed pod consisting of backwardly aculeate replum and firmly papery valves that fall away in one piece characterizes M. ceratonia and closely related M. medioxima and M. carvalhoi.
South of Amazonia these are with one exception confined to the Atlantic coastal plain or lower foothills, but M. ceratonia occurs also in the West Indies.
Because the center of diversity for the group is clearly in Bahia, and because M. ceratonia is isolated morphologically among the mimosas of the AntUles, its occurrence there is probably secondary, though certainly ancient, since it was seen there by Charles Plumier in late XVII century.
Detailed comparison of AntiUean M. ceratonia with its Brazilian counterpart, which Bentham in Flora brasiliensis mistook for M. obovata and which Taubert later described as M. pseudoobovata, discloses no difference of substance.
Taubert distinguished his species from M. ceratonia by pubescence, larger leaffets, and unarmed peduncles, but pubescence alone survives as distinctive, and this, although always wanting in the West Indies, varies considerably between Brazilian populations otherwise alike.
Since there is no perceptible difference in leaf-formula, in venation of leaffets, or in structure of ffower and fmit between Brazilian and AntiUean plants of this group, it has become impossible to recognize more than one variable and widespread species.
For an account of the long-lasting confusion between Brazilian M. ceratonia and M. obovata see discussion of M. laticifera (p. 257).
In the first description of this mimosa, Plumier likened the leaves to those of Siliqua Toumefort, the Locust Bean that Linnaeus called Ceratonia, from which the epithet is derived.
Key to varieties of M. ceratonia 1.
Stems, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence all, or mostly, at least thinly pilosulous, but hairs sometimes reduced to rudiments along ventral ribs of If-stk and on pulvinules; Brazil (Pemambuco to Sta. Catarina).
2.
Plants of lowland forest and restinga below 200 m on or at edge of Atlantic Coastal Plain from Pemambuco to Sta. Catarina; pinnae (2-)3-5-jug. and lfts of distal pinnae 3- or 3- 5-jug 166a. var. pseudo-obovata (p. 260).
2.
Plants of upland interior Bahia (± 12°-l 3*'S); pinnae 2(-3)-jug. and lfts of distal pinnae 2(- 3)-jug 166b. var. interior (p. 262).
1.
Stems, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence perfectly glabrous; West Indies 166c. var. ceratonia (p. 262).
166a. Mimosa ceratonia Linnaeus var. pseudoobovata (Taubert) Bameby, Brittonia 37: 86.
1985, based on M. pseudo-obovata Taubert, Rora 75: 74.
1892.-"Habitat in Brazilia loco non indicato, Glaziou 7795^."-Holotypus, collected (Glaziou, 1906: 183) at "Guaximdeba, Rio de Jan[eiro]," -^B = F Neg. 1426\; isotypi, collected 26.
X.1890 (fl), C! K! = IPA Neg. 1295 = NY Neg. 1923, 11638, P! 8 0 MAP 24.
West Indies and parts of North America.
Range of M. ceratonia Linnaeus.
M. pungentissima Ducke, Mem. Inst.
Oswaldo Cruz 51: 457.
1953.—"Recife (Pemambuco), in terrae altae silvis frequens; specimina loco Estrada da Aldeia lecta, florifera 29-VIII-1950, Dardano A. Lima 50- 629, fmctifera 20-XI-1951, A. Ducke et Dardano A. Lima 23."-Syntypi, IAN 71096 and 1060531- Equated with M. pseudo-obovata by Ducke, Anais Acad. BrasU.
Ci.
31: 291.
1959.
M. obovata sensu Bentham, 1876: 364, ex parte, quoad pi. bahianas et catarinenses, exclus. typ.; Rizzini & Mattos Filho in diagnosi M. laticiferae, q.v.; Rizzini, Leandra 5: 38.
1975.
M. pseudo-obovata sensu Burkart, 1979: 152; Morim de Lima, 1985, photo 11.
Characters as given in key.
In restinga thickets and at edge of moist forest, surviving and sometimes weedy in capoeira, in cocoa plantations, and in hedges, commonly climbing through and over bushes and trees, less often free-standing but then diffusely procumbent (never reported independently arborescent), discontinuously scattered along the Atlantic coast and foothills of Brazil between Pemambuco and Sta. Catarina, collected most frequently in Bahia and Rio de Janeiro (not seen from S. Paulo); n. Maranhao—R. V-VII, XI-II, perhaps irregularly in other months.
Map 24.
166b. Mimosa ceratonia Linnaeus var. interior Bameby, Brittonia 37: 139, fig. 6B. 1985.- "Brazil.
Bahia: Mucuge, rod. para Andarai, 16 Jun 1984 (fl, fr), G. Hatschbach (with R. Kummrow) ^7957. "
— Holotypus, MBM 91896\; isotypi, NY! RB! Characters as given in key.
In capoeira, at elevation not recorded but probably near 700 m, local on the e. slope of Chapada Diamantina in lat. 12°-13°S (Afranio Peixoto; near Andarai), centr. Bahia.—Fl.
V-VI(- ?).
Map 24.
In the protologue of var. interior I stressed as apparent differences from var. pseudo-obovata the leaf-formula, the apparently dissimilar ecology, and the axillary rather than pseudoracemose or paniculate capitula.
On reffection I think it likely that the inflorescence character may be fortuitous, and the others need testing against further collections.
166c. Mimosa ceratonia Linnaeus var. ceratonia.
M. ceratonia Linnaeus, 1753, I.e., sens. str.—^^Habitat in America calidiore.^^—Based on Acacia repens aculeata .
.
. foliis siliquae Plumier, Cat. pi. amer.
17.
1703 = Mimosa aculeata etc.
J. Burman, PI. amer.
1: t. 8.
1755.—Typus, the copy of Plumier's drawing made for Boerhaave and seen by Linnaeus in Leiden in 1737, afterwards published by Burman, I.e.—Acacia ceratonia (Linnaeus) Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1091.
1806.
Lomoplis ceratonia (Linnaeus) Rafinesque, Sylva tellur.
118.
1838.
M. ceratonia sensu Grisebach, Fl.
Brit.
W. 1.219.
1864; Bentham, 1875: 422; Britton & WUson, Sci. Surv.
Porto Rico & Virgin Is. 5(3): 357.
1924; Rose & Leonard, 1927: 255; Liogier, 1985: 49.
Lomoplis ceratonia sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 174. (?) Mimosa obovata sensu Cardenas de Guevara, 1974: 141.
Characters as given in key.
Bmshy hillsides, thickets and waste places, climbing into trees and hedges, on Puerto Rico ascending to 900 m, native in West Indies from Dominican Republic w.-ward through Puerto Rico and Virgin Is., s. through Lesser Antilles from Antigua to St. Vincent; reported by Bentham (1876: 364) from Venezuela.-H. IX-II, sporadically V, VI, perhaps randomly through the year, the fmits long persistent.—Zarza (Dominican Republic); black amaret (St. Thomas); amourette (Guadeloupe); croc-d-chien (Martinique).
Map 24.
167.
Mimosa medioxima Bameby, Brittonia 37: 139, fig. 6C, D. 1985.-"BrazU.
Bahia: Mun. de Valen^a, 11 km na estrada para Orob6 partindo da estrada BR-101/Valen9a, 190 m, 10 Jan 1982 (fr), G. P. Lewis (with A. M. de Carvalho) 1067.''—Holotypus, CEPEC 303241; isotypi, K! NY! Prickly sarmentose shrubs attaining 5 m, in habit armature, scant pubescence, shape of lfts and structure of pod not different from M. ceratonia var. pseudo-obovata, but in lf-formula approaching M. carvalhoi, and the inflorescence apparently much simplified.
Stipules 1.5-2.5 x 0.4- 0.6 mm, persistent.
Leafstalks 1-3 cm, the petiole 10-17 X 0.55-0.8 mm, the single interpinnal segment of a few distal lvs 4-13 mm; pinnae lor 2-jug., the rachis 5-20 mm, the interval between pulvinus and first (or only) pair of lfts 3- 10 mm; lfts of most pinnae 1-, of the second pair sometimes 2-jug., obliquely obovate emarginate ±13-22 X 9-17 mm, in texture, color and venation like lfts of M. ceratonia.
Peduncles (known only in fmit) from ±2-4 If-axils near tip of branchlets, 15-20 mm, not (as in related spp.) in ample efoliate panicles.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 9A) of M ceratonia, 6-8-seeded.
Mimosa medioxima has the sarmentose habit, thin pubescence, prickly stems, obovate leaflets and woodland habitat of M. ceratonia var. pseudo-obovata, but almost the simplified leaf-formula of M. carvalhoi.
The type has a short, fewcapitulate, leafy-bracteate inflorescence that contrasts with the usually ample leafless panicle of M. ceratonia; but it may be an uncharacteristic specimen in this respect.
While M. medioxima resembles M. carvalhoi in number of leaflets per pinna, the pinnae are fewer and bome on shorter common leaf-stalks, and the leaflets themselves are of different shape.
Mimosa ceratonia var. interior approaches M. medioxima in simplified leaf-formula, but has the long leaf-stalks of its species.
168.
Mimosa carvalhoi Bameby, Brittonia 37: 141, fig. 7.
1985.-"BrazU.
Bahia: Dunas nos arredores da Lago de Abaete, ±30 km a N do centro da cidade de Salvador, 22 May 1981 (fl), A. M. de Carvalho (with Mori & Boom) 690."-Holotypus, CEPEC 235461; isotypi, K! NY! RB! UB! US!; paratypus, ibid.
11 .IV.
1976 (fr), /. da S. Araujo 007, K! Fig.
11.
Macrophyllidious subarborescent ^/zrwZ?^ ±2.5 m with smooth lustrous reddish homotinous branchlets, glabrous except for microscopic granules on new stems and axes of pyramidally branched exserted inflorescence, armed only on back of lf-stks with recurved aculei ±1-1.5 mm, the few large plane lfts moderately bicolored, olivaceous above, a little paler beneath, palmately veined.
Stipules firm reddish triangular-subulate 1-2.5 X 0.5-0.7 mm, bluntly 1-nerved dorsally, subpersistent.
Leaf-stalks 3-9 cm, the petiole (1-) 1.5-4 cm, at middle 0.6-0.9 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 10-24 mm, the shallow ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae (1-2)3-jug., when all bifoliolate subequilong but the distal pair longest when 4-foliolate, the axis between the minute basal paraphyllidia and the first (or only) pair of lfts (5-)8-15 mm, the interfoliolar segment when present ±10 mm; lfts of almost aU pinnae 1-jug., of rare distal pinnae 2-jug., the reddish wrinkled pulvinule 1-1.5 mm, the blade obliquely broadelliptic, very obtuse or subemarginate 11-22 x 12-22 mm, ± as wide as or a little wider than long, reddish around the plane margin, 5-7- nerved from pulvinule, the displaced midrib and 2 inner posterior nerves sharply prominulous beneath, the rest less so, aU but the midrib expiring or weakly brochidodrome within the margin, both the primary and weak open reticular venulation immersed but discolored above.
Peduncles 2-6 per node of inflorescence, 5-10 mm; capitula without filaments 4.5-5 mm diam.; bracts pink elliptic ±1 X 0.4 mm; fl-buds obovoid glabrous; flowers 3-merous 6-androus (random fls in some heads 4-merous 8-androus); calyx campanulate 0.7 mm, the rim shallow-undulate; corolla ochroleucous pink-tipped vase-shaped 2-2.3 mm, the ovate 1-nerved, almost plane lobes ±1.4 x 1 mm; filaments free, ochroleucous, exserted 4- 4.5 mm; ovary glabrous.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 9B) solitary, sessile, in profile oblong slightly decurved 40-60 X 12-16 mm, 6-9-seeded, the armed replum and continuous valves as in M. ceratonia.
On white sand dunes near 10 m, known only from vicinity of Lago de Abaete n. of Salvador, n.-e. Bahia.-H. V-VI; fr. (?-)I-III. Mimosa carvalhoi appears to be a specialized derivative of M. ceratonia, of which it preserves the mostly trimerous, ochroleucous flower and the marginally aculeate pod with entire valves.
Its arborescent rather than scrambling habit of growth, only residually aculeate leaf-stalks, and larger, fewer, firmer leaflets are adaptations to a dune habitat.
169.
Mimosa brachystachya Taubert, Flora 75: 73.
1892.—"Habitat in Brasilia austro-orientali loco non indicato: Glaziou n. 12642."
, the locality given by Glaziou, 1906: 183: "Sao Gon^alo do rio Preto, Minas Gerais."
—Holotypus, collected 28.
IV. 1881 (fl), ^B = F. Neg. 1399\; isotypi, C, G, K (2 sheets)! = NY Neg. 1919, 11637, M! P (3 sheets)! Sarmentose shrubs of unrecorded stature, the flowering branches resembling those of M. ceratonia, the stems below the efluse exserted pyramidal panicle of ellipsoid capitula vertically striped and armed with coarse recurved aculei 3-5 mm arising from swollen pediment (perhaps sometimes unarmed), and like all axes of lvs and inflorescence thinly pUosulous or pubemlent with weak hairs to 0.1-0.3 mm mixed with minute thickened discolored trichomes, the lf-stks randomly remotely aculeolate or unarmed, the relatively ample plane thin-textured lfts bicolored, when dry dull dark brown above, paler beneath, glabrous except for rare random ciUa, the inflorescence branches incurved-ascending efoliate, but some lower ones subtended by a If.
Stipules erect incurved linear-lanceolate 2.5-5 x 0.4-0.7 mm, bluntly 1-nerved dorsally, persistent or tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks of major lvs 6-10 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 2.5-4 cm, at FIG. 11.
Mimosa carvalhoi Bameby.
A. Flowering branchlet.
B. Pinna, ventral view.
C. Upper part of leafstalk.
D. Flower + bract. (All from Carvalho 690.) middle 0.6-1.1 mm diam., the 1-3 interpinnal segments 1.3-3 cm, the ventral groove weakly bridged between pinna-pairs or sometimes continuous, spicules 0; pinnae 2-4-jug., accrescent upward, the rachis of furthest or penultimate pair 2.5-4.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 3.5-8 mm; lfts of further pairs 4-6-jug., accrescent distally, the first pair 3-11 mm distant from minute (often alternate) paraphyllidia, all in outline obovate or oblong-obovate from shallowly semicordate base, broadly obtuse at apex, the larger pairs 13-23 x 6-14 mm, ±0.5-0.75 times as wide as long, all deUcately nerve-marginate and (3-)4-nerved from pulvinule, the exterior nerve on either side very short, the inner posterior one incurved-ascending to or well beyond mid-blade, the slightly displaced midrib giving rise on each side to 4-6 secondary venules slenderly brochidodrome just short of the margin, the pallid venulation contrasting on both faces with dark intervenium, almost immersed above, sharply prominulous beneath.
Peduncles fasciculate by 2-4,12-20 mm, bracteolate near or above middle, the bracteole caducous; capitula in panicles; y/ow^r^ 3-merous 6-androus glabrous, described as pink, the lower ones staminate; calyx (disregarding minute thickened pedicel) campanulate subtmncate 0.3- 0.6 mm glabrous; corolla of fls at and beyond mid-capitulum narrowly turbinate 1.8-2.7 mm, the plane ovate 1-nerved lobes 1-1.2 x 0.8-1 mm; filaments free to base or almost so, presumably pink, the longer ones exserted ± 5 mm; ovary glabrous; pod unknown.
In moist thickets at elevations not recorded, apparently rare, known only from the type-locality, perhaps on n. slope of Sa. da Mantiqueira n. of Mt. Itatiaia, and from middle valley of rio Jequitinhonha between Itaobim and Ara^uai, near 16°40'S in n.-e. Minas Gerais.—Fl.
IV-V(- Of the two collections here referred to M. brachystachya the type is armed below the paniculate inflorescence with stout scattered prickles, whereas that from near Ara9uai (Mendes Magalhaes 15407, NY, UB) is unarmed.
Otherwise they are in close agreement and I cannot think them other than conspecific.
Mimosa brachystachya appears related on the one hand to M. caesalpiniifolia and on the other to M. ceratonia, both similar in leaf-formula and in trimerous flowers, but the flowers of M. brachystachya are described both by Glaziou and by Mendes Magalhaes as pink, whereas the filaments of kindred species are consistently white or cream-white, so that the flowers or partial inflorescences are perceived as white, even though the lobes of the florets may be tinged with red.
Aside from flower-color, M. brachystachya differs from M. caesalpiniifolia in weak sarmentose, not independently arborescent life-form, but in this respect is not different from M. ceratonia var. pseudo-obovata.
The ellipsoid capitula, often with a few flowers scattered along the peduncle below the principal head, are intermediate in form between the globose capitula of M. ceratonia and the short narrow catkins of M. caesalpiniifolia.
The venation of the leaflets is also intermediate in some respects.
The secondary nerves arising from the midrib are brochidodrome, as in M. ceratonia, but loop back on one another only just short of a fine marginal nerve that is lacking in M. ceratonia; they do not, as in M. caesalpiniifolia, mn straight out to anastomosis with the marginal one.
It remains to be learned whether the pod of M. brachystachya breaks when ripe into free-falling articles, like that of M. caesalpiniifolia, or whether the valves fall away from the replum in one piece, as in M. ceratonia, a feature that will be crucial in assessment of the present species' tme affinity.
In the introduction to his Liste, Glaziou (1906) spoke of a Rio Preto in Minas Gerais that runs northward to Rio Grande from Mt. Itatiaia, and I have suggested above that this is the type-locality of M. brachystachya.
There are, however, several streams of this name in Minas Gerais, and moreover several hamlets called Sao Gon- 9alo, and it is possible that Glaziou's locality was on the upper rio Jequitinhonha, where M. brachystachya was rediscovered by Mendes Magalhaes.
A Mimosa brachystachys attributed to Vahl (Eel. amer.
3: 34.
1807) by DeCandolle (Prod, syst. veg. 2: 437, in syn. 1825) is a mistake for M. macrostachya and therefore no impediment to M. brachystachya Taubert.
B(xxi).
Series CORDISTIPULAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Cordistipulae Barneby, ser. nov. e ser. Leptopodis Bentham excerpta et ampliata, flosculis fere semper trimeris, stipulis latiusculis costa excurrenti saepissime mucronatis, indumento fere semper ex parte glanduloso, necnon spiculis interpinnalibus et paraphyllidiis nuUis ab affini ser. Filipedibus abstans. —Sp. typica: M. cordistipula Bentham.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Leptopodae Bentham, ex parte [1876, spp. 150-153, 161].
Microphyllidious, often functionally herbaceous subshrubs seldom more than 1 m (but M. blanchetii attaining 2 m), mostly unarmed but some armed with scattered (not serial cat's-claw) aculei.
Pubescence potentially triple, composed of villi, plain setae (sometimes aculeiform) and gland-tipped setae (each sometimes suppressed or almost so), the setae when present smooth.
Stipules ovate or lanceolate 1-7-, rarely 7-11- nerved, the midrib often excurrent as a mucro or spinule.
Leaf-formula (ii-)iii-xiii(-xix, in M. blanchetii xv-xxx)/(3-)4-18(-22); interpinnal spicules 0.
Capitula commonly globose (in M. xiquexiquensis spiciform), without filaments 4- 8(-9) mm diam.; flowers (with random exceptions) 3-merous, either sessile or pedicellate; calyx membranous 0.2-0.6 mm, tmncate or obscurely denticulate, naked or minutely ciliolate; bisexual corollas (2-)2.3-3.5(-4) mm; filaments either monadelphous at base or almost free.
Pods stipitate or sessile, in profile linear, 3.5-5 (in M. blanchetii 5-7) mm wide, the replum 0.35-0.8 mm diam., the valves disarticulating.
Spp. 13, primarily of tropical e. Brazil (Piaui and Ceara to Rio Grande do Norte, s. to centr. Minas Gerais), most numerous and critical in n. Bahia, one extending disjunctly to Paraguay and n.-e. Argentina, and (probably adventive) to n.- e. Mexico.
The ser. Cordistipulae is closely akin to ser. Paucifoliatae and ser. Filipedes, but differs from both in suppression of interpinnal spicules and paraphyllidia, and further from ser. Paucifoliatae by trimerous ffowers.
The members of these three series known to Bentham were referred by him to a collective ser. Leptopodae in sect. Habbasia, but as new elements of the group have come to light a division of Leptopodae into three independent groups appears useful.
Of these three the ser. Cordistipulae appears the most advanced.
It is a closely coherent group, with center of diversity in Bahia and states immediately to the north, in microclimates marked by pronounced periods of drought.
Speciation in ser. Cordistipulae has been accompanied by modification in leaf-formula, while the ffower and fmit remained little altered.
Notable individual features of particular Cordistipulae are the spicate infforescence of M. xiquexiquensis, the multiplication of extremely short pinnae and the relatively broad pod of M. blanchetii, the curiously fimbriate stipules of M. borboremae, the spinulose tip of leafstalk and pinna-rachis in M. cordistipula, and in M. setuligera the pair of fine setae situated adjacent to the pinna-pulvinus at the spot occupied in ser. Paucifoliatae by paraphyllidia.
Mimosa * Fls capitulate.
170.
171.
172.
173.
174. guaranitica Chodat & Hassler misera Bentham a. var. misera b. var. subinermis (Bentham) Bameby leptantha Bentham ulbrichiana Harms minarum Bameby Conspectus of ser. Cordistipulae 175. morroensis Bameby 176. brevipinna Bentham 111. hirsuticaulis Harms lis. setuligera Harms 179. borboremae Harms 180. cordistipula Bentham 181. blanchetii Bentham ** Fls spicate.
182. xiquexiquensis Bameby 1.
Key to species of ser. Cordistipulae Pinnae (12-) 15-30-jug. and the rachis of each pinna only 2-4 mm long, the If-blade in consequence many times longer than wide, suggesting a branchlet with many pairs of smaU opposite, simply pinnate lvs; pod 5-7 mm wide; n.-centr. Bahia 181.
M. blanchetii (p. 278).
Pinnae mostly (2-)3-12-, rarely to 19-jug., the rachis of distal ones (5-)6-35 mm; pod (so far as known) 3.5-5 mm wide; widespread.
2.
Fls spicate, the axis of receptacle 10-22 mm; pinnae of longer lvs 10-19-jug 182.
M. xiquexiquensis (p. 279).
2.
Fls capitate, the receptacle much less than 5 mm; pinnae of longer lvs 2-13-jug. 3.
Stipules broadly ovate and their margin spinulose-fimbriate by excurrent nerves; Paraiba and Pemambuco 179.
M. borboremae (p. 276).
3.
Stipules simply mucronate or spinulose at apex, the margin entire.
4.
Rs sessile or nearly so, the pedicel if present not over 0.25 mm: microspecies, closely related.
5.
Petiole proper 9-37 mm and 2-5 times as long as the first interpinnal segment of If-stk. 6.
Rachis of longer pinnae 9-30 mm, bearing 10-18 pairs of lfts weakly venulose beneath.
7.
Pinnae 3-4-jug; stipules 7-11-nerved; in taboleiro at low elevation in S. Francisco valley, n. Bahia 177.
M. hirsuticaulis (p. 275).
7.
Pinnae 6-9-jug.; stipules 3-5-nerved; in caatinga near 1000 m in centr. Bahia. .. 175.
M. morroensis (p. 273).
6.
Rachis of longer pinnae 5-11 mm, bearing 6-12(-13) pairs of lfts faintly 1-nerved beneath by discolored but immersed midrib.
8.
Stems and If-axes alike densely viscid-puberulent but only remotely setose; pulvinus of pinnae not 2-setose; calyx-tube and corolla-lobes glabrous; Piaui 176.
M. brevipinna (p. 274).
8.
Stems densely yellowish-hispid as well as viscid-puberulent but rachis of pinnae glabrous except for a pair of setae inserted at top of pulvinus; calyx-tube and corollalobes glandular-hispidulous; n. Bahia and adj. Piaui 178.
M. setuligera (p. 276).
5.
Petiole proper 1-12(-16) mm and either not longer (often shorter) than, at most 1.5 times as long as the first interpinnal segment of If-stk. 9.
Lfts of longer pinnae (13-)14-22-jug.; longer lf-stks 25-55 mm and rachis of longer pinnae 15-35 mm; n.-centr. Bahia; s.-e. Piaui 173.
M. ulbrichiana (p. 271).
9.
Lfts of longer pinnae 6-13-jug.; longer lf-stks either longer or shorter than in the last but the rachis of longer pinnae 5-14 mm; widespread.
10.
Lf-stks and rachis of pinnae alike stiflly spinulose at apex; Chapada Diamantina at 1000-1150 m 180.
M. cordistipula (p. 277).
10.
Lf-stks and rachis of pinnae weakly appendaged, not spinulose.
11.
Lf-stks relatively long and their pinnae relatively short, the lf-formula vi-x(- xii)/8-13, the whole If-stk 30-65 mm and rachis of longer pinnae 5-12 mm; n.-centr. Minas Gerais at 900-1100 m 174.
M minarum (p. 272).
11.
Lf-stks relatively short and pinnae relatively long, the lf-formula ii-viii/6-13, the whole If-stk 5-35 mm and the rachis of longer pinnae 6-20 mm; allopatric.
12.
Lfts thick-textured firm, the longer ones 1.8-3 times as long as wide; in caatinga and taboleiro formations at low elevations from n. Bahia n. through adj. Piaui and Pemambuco to Ceara 171.
M. misera (p. 268).
12.
Lfts membranous, the longer ones 3-4 times as long as wide; extratropical Paraguay and adj. n.-e. Argentina, and in isolated stations in upland centr. and far w. Bahia, in lowland Rio Grande do Norte, and remotely disjunct in n.-e. Mexico 170.
M guaranitica (p. 267).
4.
Fls elevated on a pedicel 0.5-0.7 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 3-6-jug.; n.-e. Ceara 172.
M. leptantha (p. 270).
170.
Mimosa guaranitica Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4(6): 555 [=P1. hassler.
2: 413].
1904.—"[Paraguay]... in dumetis Cordillera de Altos, Febr., n. 3888; in campis Tacuaral, Jan., n. 3817; in dumetis pr. Bellavista, Dec, n. 8135."—Lectotypus,//a55/^rJ577, G! = F Neg. 28211; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 57258, K! NY! P! W!; syntypi, Hassler 3888, G!,
8135, G! M. guaranitica fma heterotricha Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 105,fig.13.1948.-"Argentina.
Corrientes: Dep.
General Paz, Puisoye, Tito S. Ibarrola 3656 . .. 29.
X.1945 "-Holotypus, LIL 135990, not seen.
M. guaranitica sensu Burkart, 1948: 103; Lewis, 1987, fig. 9K. Slender diffuse subshrubs with functionally herbaceous or at base weakly fmtescent, simple or few-branched stems 3-7 dm assurgent from woody root-stock, commonly viscid-villosulous almost throughout with minute retrocurved hairs, some longer straight lustrous ones, and many gland-tipped setulae to 0.7-1.2 mm, but the retrorse hairs sometimes lacking, or setulae short or wanting, or (in Paraguay-Argentina) some plants glabrate subeglandular, none aculeate, the green subconcolorous lfts glabrous or thinly pilosulous on lower face, setulose-fimbriolate, the globose capitula solitary and geminate in distal If-axils, on peduncle surpassing the subtending If Stipules erect, thinly herbaceous lance-ovate 1.5-2.5 X 0.7-1.4 mm, the stout midrib excurrent as a mucro, the blade persistent.
Leaf-stalks (10-) 15-35 mm, the petiole including pulvinus 1.5-12 X 0.3-0.45 mm, the interpinnal segments 3-8 mm; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae commonly (3-)4-6-, in Argentina sometimes to 8-, in Mexico 3-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 9-20 mm, the interfoliolar segments 1-1.8 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (6-)7- 11(-13)-jug., decrescent proximally, the first pair 0.8-2(-2.5) mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades narrowly oblong obtuse, those near mid-rachis 3-5 x 0.85-1.4 mm, 2.9- 4.1 times as long as wide, the subcentric midrib faintly discernible dorsally but fully immersed.
Peduncles 3-5.5 cm; capitula without filaments 5-5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-oblanceolate or -spatulate less than 1 mm, sometimes minutely fimbriolate, caducous; y/ovv^r^ 3-merous 6-androus or (t. Burkart) randomly 4-merous, the proximal ones staminate and a little shorter and proportionately wider than the rest; pedicels 0-0.2 mm; calyx membranous, the campanulate glabrous tube 0.35- 0.5 mm, the obscurely denticulate rim sometimes with a few minute gland-tipped setulae; bisexual corollas narrowly vase-shaped 2.4-2.7 mm, the 1-nerved lobes 1-1.2 x 0.9-1.1 mm, glabrous; filaments pink, free almost to base, exserted 4.5-6 mm.
Pods 1-5 ascending from apex of receptacle, in profile linear straight 19-42 x 3.5-4.7 mm, (3-)4-7-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 1-2 mm, short-acuminate at apex, the shallowly undulate replum ±0.6 mm wide, this and the valves from nearly glabrous to densely gray-pubemlent with or without intermingled gland-tipped setulae, the valves sometimes further (or alternatively) hispidulous with pallid erect eglandular (under magnification minutely retrobarbellate) setulae, when fully ripe breaking up into free-falling biconvex, individually dehiscent articles 3-5 mm long. In sandy campo, pastures, cerrado, and savanna, apparently most common and most variable in s.-e. Paraguay and adj. Argentina (Misiones, Corrientes), thence scattered n.-ward in remotely disjunct localities in e. Brazil and e. Mexico: at ± 800-1000 m, in campo mpestre and cerrado in e.-centr. Goias and in Bahia, both on Espigao Mestre (rio Corrente) and on centr. Chapada Diamantina (mun. Rio do Contas); at low elevation in Rio Grande do Norte (near Natal); and at 22°25'N in lowland Tamaulipas (Lomas del Real).-Fl. s.-ward X-II, in Bahia XII-V, in Natal IX-X, in Mexico late summer.
In the protologue of M. guaranitica Hassler recognized its evident affinity to M. misera, from which, as from M. minarum and other members of its group, it differs principally in leaf-formula, in disposition of pinnae along the leaf-stalk, and in number or texture of leaflets, as set forth in the key to the series.
Its discontinuous dispersal is enigmatic.
Until lately it was known only from Paraguay and adjoining Argentina and was naturaUy supposed to be native there.
All its close relatives, however, are endemic to northeastern Brazil, and it therefore seems probable that M. guaranitica is a relatively late immigrant to the Parana basin, though whether by natural means of dispersal or by human intervention it is impossible to determine.
The unexpected appearance of M. guaranitica in Tamaulipas has two possible explanations: it is an anthropochorous newcomer to Mexico, or shares the apparently natural bicentric range of, e.g., Rhynchosia senna Hook.
171.
Mimosa misera Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 411.
1842.—Typus infra sub var. misera indicatur.
Small, usually diffiise shrublets from knotty root-crown, either unarmed except for random small aculeoli on back of some lf-stks or armed on intemodes with few erect yellowish aculei to 1-2.5 mm, the homotinous stems either simple or few-branched and like lf-stks and Ifts varying from subglabrous to quite densely vUlosulous and viscid with spreading-ascending lustrous plain hairs to 0.5-1.5 mm mixed with slender glandtipped setulae (but plain hairs sometimes confined to stipule-margins and ventral face of lfstks, and setulae sometimes rare or 0), the firm plane subconcolorous lfts varying from glabrous on both faces and ciliolate or not so to pilosulous beneath or on both faces, the globose or plumply ovoid-ellipsoid, mostly solitary capitula elevated from distal If-axils on peduncle at least equaling and commonly 2-5 times longer than the associated If.
Stipules ovate acute or broadly lanceacuminate (1.5-)2-4.5 X 1.2-2.5 mm, the blade lustrous glabrous dorsally, mucronate by coarse excurrent midrib, persistent.
Leaves either homomorphic and solitary or subdimorphic, then both soUtary and fasciculate on short-shoots, the If-stk 5-30 mm, the petiole including pulvinus 1-10 X 0.4-0.8 mm, the interpinnal segments (1-)2-9 mm; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae 1-1- jug., the proximal ones shortest, the rachis of distal ones 6-12(-13) mm, the interfoUolar segments 0.5-1 mm; lfts of distal pinnae (4-)6-l 1(- 13)-jug., decrescent proximally or at each end of rachis, the first pair less than 2 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades oblong obtuse from shallowly semicordate base, those at and beyond mid-rachis (2-)2.3-5 x 0.7-1.8(-2) mm, 1.8-3 times as long as wide, all veinless above, the slender subcentric midrib visible beneath but immersed.
Peduncles 1.5-6(-7) cm; capitula without filaments 5-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts filamentous linearspatulate 0.5-1.1 X 0.15-0.3 mm; pedicels 0- 0.25 mm; flowers 3-merous 6-androus, only a few distal ones bisexual, all glabrous or the corolla-lobes sometimes minutely setulose dorsally; calyx 0.2-0.4 mm, the rim shallowly angulatedenticulate; bisexual corollas 2.1-3.4 mm, the membranous ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.9-1.2 x 0.8- 1.2 mm; filaments monadelphous through 0.5 mm or less, but only lightly coherent, exserted 6-9 mm.
Pods ascending 1-5 per capitulum, sessile at cuneate base, in profile linear (15-)20-33 X 4-4.7 mm, (3-)4-8-seeded, the shallowly undulate, glabrous or pubemlent or minutely glandular-setulose but unarmed replum 0.55-0.8 mm wide, the papery valves low-convex over each seed, either glabrous, or densely minutely graypubemlent and esetose, or both pubemlent and hispid with erect, minutely barbellate setulae to ± 1 mm, the free-falling, either individually dehiscent or indehiscent articles 3-4.5 mm long; seeds (few seen) compressed-rhomboid ±2.8 x 2 mm, the testa dull brown.
The material that I refer to M. misera includes both youthfully vigorous young plants in ample leaf and older drought-stressed, sparsely flowered or fmiting ones; these appear very different in superficial aspect and are actually dissimilar in leaf-formula and in both density and composition ofthe indumentum.
Some moreover are randomly aculeate, others unarmed except for random small prickles on some leaf-stalks.
My concept of the species is consequently somewhat amorphous and indeterminate, and it requires testing by close observation in the field.
The species seems to differ from M. brevipinna in fewer pmnae and prevaUingly shorter petioles, and from M. guaranitica in sturdier growth-habit and broader leaffets.
It is closely related to both.
No two collections of M misera are precisely alike, and in each collection that consists of several plants I have found some measure of variation in development oflarger primary or shorter fasciculate leaves, and in proportion and density of the several sorts of trichome: minute incurved hairs, longer spreading plain ones, gland-tipped setulae, and setaculei.
The intrapopulational variation in stature and potential size of primary leaves, which may reffect conditions of growth rather than genetic differentiation, is also so marked as to have induced description of segregates.
Of these M. remansoana represents one small extreme.
It was doubtfully referred by Harms to ser. Stipellares, thereby escaping comparison with its broad-stipulate kindred with trimerous flowers close at hand in the lower S. Francisco valley.
The tall extreme is M. franciscana, which Bentham himself doubted might be vigorous M. misera, described from stunted specimens.
Mimosa franciscana was based on two collections from "islands and banks of rio S. Francisco near Joazeiro," both annotated by Bentham as M. misera var.: in one (M, ticketed no. 557 = F Neg. 6182, no. 552) the unarmed stems appear to have been diffuse and the pod is densely villosulous but lacks setae; in the other (M, ticketed n. 553 = IPA Neg. 1347, n. 554) the stems appear to be more erect, possibly fmticose, and are sparsely aculeate, while the pods are glabrous except for short setulae on the valves.
Neither agrees at all points with the protologue of M. franciscana, which may have been compiled from both.
I have arbitrarily selected the first of these (M! annotated) as lectotype and interpret it as a robust form of M. misera.
I am unable at present to classify the second collection but suspect it is little more than a form of the same.
Until this can be confirmed, I exclude its aberrant characteristics from my definition of var. misera.
Very close to M. misera and not, in my opinion, specifically distinguishable, is M. adenocarpa var. subinermis Benth.,
which seems to differ inconclusively in somewhat more numerous pinnae coinciding with prickly stems.
It agrees perfectly with M. misera in broad mucronate stipules and trimerous flowers, and lacks the interpinnal spicules and paraphyllidia characteristic of M. adenocarpa.
It is connected to var. misera directly through Hatschbach 39588 (NY) from near Morro do Chapeu, which has the leafformula of var. subinermis but unarmed stems.
Provisionally but without much confidence I maintain this as a variety.
Key to varieties of M. misera 1.
Pinnae of primary lvs mostly 2-4(-5)-, exceptionaUy to 7-jug; stems unarmed (but some lfstks randomly aculeolate) 171a. var. misera (p. 270).
1.
Pinnae of primary lvs 4-7-jug.; stems aculeate.
171b. var. subinermis (p. 270).
171a. Mimosa misera Bentham var. misera.
M. misera Bentham, 1842, I.e., sens, str.—"Piauhy, Gardner, n. 2133.'\ the data expanded and corrected in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 369.
1876 to: "prope Lagoa Comprida [7°15'S, 40°44'W] provinciae Piauhiensis: Gardner n. 2134."
— Holotypus, collected 11.1839 (fl), originaUy numbered 2133 but the last digit altered in ink to4, K(hb. Benth.)! = NYNeg.
11645; isotypi, Gardner 2134, BM! K (hb. Hook.)! = IPA Neg. 1287 = NY Neg. 1873.
M. franciscana Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 431.
1875 & in Martius, ¥\. bras. 15(2): 369, descr. ampliat.
1876.—"Habitat in insulis et ad ripas Rio S. Francisco ad Joazeiro provinciae Bahiensis: Martius."
—Lectotypus, Martius 2353, collected IV. 1819 (fl, fr), M (2 sheets)! = F Neg. 6182 = IPA Neg. 1346.—For discussion of lectotypification see above.
M. remansoana Harms, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 42: 207.
1908.—"Bahia: Taboleiro bei Remanso (ULE n. 7390-Jan. 1907)."-Holotypus, +B = FNeg.
14311; isotypi, HBG! K! = NY Neg. 11643, L! M. misera var. misera sensu Lewis, 1987, fig. 9H. Characters as given in key to varieties.
In dry sandy places, in caatinga or taboleiro, 50-500(-?) m, scattered over n.-e. Brazil from centr. Piaui to e. Ceara, s. through w. Pemambuco to the lower S. Francisco valley in Bahia (S. Inacio; Pilao Arcado, Remanso, Joazeiro) and (intermediate to var. subinermis) the n. Chapada Diamantina near Morro do Chapeu.—Fl.
IV-V, X-XII, the full season not established.
171b. Mimosa misera Bentham var. subinermis (Bentham) Bameby, Brittonia 37: 147 [sphalm. ^'inermis^^].
1985.
M adenocarpa ? var. subin- ^rm/5 Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 380.
1876.—"Habitat in silvis Catingas ad Joazeiro provinciae Bahiensis: Martius."
—Holotypus, Martius s.n.,
collected IV. 1819 (fl, fr), M (3 sheets)! = IPA Negs.
1340, 1341 = NY Neg. 11552.—M. adenocarpa var. subinermis fma bahiensis Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 7.
1910, nom. superfl. Characters as given in key to varieties.
In caatinga or campo mpestre, at elevations not recorded, known only from the type-locality (perhaps mistakenly recorded as Joazeiro, in n. Bahia) and from the valley of rio das Contas in s.-centr. Bahia (Ibiquara), the full dispersal problematic.-Fl.
III-V, IX-X. 172.
Mimosa leptantha Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 411.
1842.-"Avacaty [sic], Gardner.'', expanded in H. bras. 15(2): 369.
1876 to: ".
.
. in collibus arenosis prope Aracaty provinciae Bahiensis [properly Ceara]: Gardner n. 7556."-Holotypus, collected VII.1838 (fl), K (hb. Hook.)! = IPA Neg. 1288 = NY Negs.
1874, 11667; isotypus, BM! M. leptantha sensu Bentham, 1875: 432.
Small difluse unarmed microphyllidious subshrub with purplish-brown stems 3.5(-?) dm, freely branching and incurved distally, the young leafy and flowering branches and the ventral face of lf-stks thinly finely pilosulous with erect plain pallid hairs to 0.5-0.8 mm intermixed with shorter, equally slender gland-tipped setulae, the subconcolorous lfts mostly glabrous facially, erratically remotely ciliolate or glandular-ciliolate, but a few dorsally pubemlent, the slender glabrous or remotely glandular peduncles solitary in axil of upper lvs, the small glabrous globose capitula exserted.
Stipules subchartaceous ovateor lance-acuminate 1.5-2.5 x 0.6-1.5 mm, glabrous dorsally, ciliolate, coarsely l(-3)-nerved, the midrib excurrent.
Leaf-stalks 9-15 mm, the subterete petiole 4-12 x 0.2-0.5 mm, in some robust primary leaves shorter than, but in most leaves longer than the rachis proper, the interpinnal segments 1.5-5 mm; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae of some early lvs 4-5-, of most distal ones exactly 2-jug., scarcely accrescent upward, the rachis of longer ones (2.5-)4-8 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.2 mm; lfts of distal pinnae (3-)4-6-jug., the first pair 0.4-0.8 mm distant from pulvinule (paraphyUidia 0), all oblong-eUiptic obtuse from shallowly semicordate base, the longer ones 2-3 x 0.7-1 mm, the plane thick-textured blades minutely paUid-dotted on both faces, the subcentric midrib faintly perceptible beneath but immersed.
Peduncles subfiliform 2.5-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments 4- 5 mm diam., each fl on a pedicel 0.5-0.7 mm, the fl-buds ovoid-ellipsoid; bracts linear-oblanceolate, ± as long as associated pedicel; flowers 3-merous 6-androus, glabrous throughout; calyx membranous, asymmetrically campanulate ±0.25 mm, the orifice tmncate; corolla narrowly turbinate 3 mm, the ovate-triangular lobes 1 x 0.6 mm, a little thickened at concave apex; filaments presumably pink, monadelphous through ±0.5 mm, exserted 4.5 mm; ovary substipitate, in early development minutely scaberulous, not seen mature.
Found by Gardner on "sand hills" near Aracati in n.-e. Ceara, not otherwise known (records from Bahia are mistaken).-R. VII-VIII(-?).
The type-collection of M. leptantha shows the partly glandular indumentum, the espiculate leafstalks, and the trimerous corolla characteristic of M. misera and its allies, among which Bentham placed it.
In this alliance the reduced leaf-formula (ii-v/3-6) and relatively long pedicels are, so far as appears from one collection, diagnostic.
The species appears close to M. guaranitica, and may possibly be an aberrant form of it.
Bentham described an immature pod as falcately linear, about 13 mm long, glabrous.
173.
Mimosa ulbrichiana Harms, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 42: 208.
1908. —"Bahia: Campo der Serra do Sao Ignacio (ULE n. 7529 —Febr. 1907)."-Holotypus, +B = F Neg. 1441\; isotypi, G! HBG! Densely leafy spreading shrublets attaining 5- 10 dm, except for sometimes facially glabrous lfts copiously viscid throughout with fine erect gland-tipped setulae to ±0.5-0.8 mm at times mixed with delicate viUi, the old wood nigrescent scaly, the globose capitula on stout axiUary peduncle as long as or longer than the associated If-stk. Stipules firm, ovate or lance-acuminate 2- 5 x 1 - 2 mm, the stout, dorsally prominulous midrib excurrent as a yellowish spinule.
Leafstalks (2-)2.5-5.5 cm, the petiole 8-16 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 3.5-9 mm, the terminal appendage lance-subulate spinulose-tipped; no interpinnal spicules; pinnae 3-5-, 5-8-jug., accrescent distaUy, the rachis of longer ones 2 - 3.5 (in Luetzelburg 2036, M, not over 1.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (13-) 14-22-jug., in sleep imbricate obliquely upward, in outline oblong obtuse, the longer ones 3.5-6 x 1.2-2 mm, the blades essentially veinless extemaUy, finely wrinkled when dry; paraphyllidia 0.
Peduncles stiffly ascending 4.5-7 cm; capitula without filaments ±8 mm diam.; bracts linear-oblanceolate conduplicate ± 3 mm, glandular-pubemlent dorsally; flowers 3-merous 6-androus, the lower ones staminate and slightly smaller than the rest; calyx campanulate subtmncate ±0.5 mm glabrous; corolla subtubular 4-4.5 mm, the ovate lobes 1.1-1.2 mm, distally callous and there pubemlent dorsally, the tube becoming pallid-scarious below the sinuses between lobes; filaments bright pink, monadelphous through nearly 1 mm, exserted 8-10 mm.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 9J) 1-8 per capitulum, sessile or almost so, the stipe if perceptible not over 1.5 mm, the body in profile broadly linear straight or slightly curved 25-45 X 5 mm, the shallowly undulate replum 0.6-0.7 mm diam., the thinly papery sublustrous valves glandular-pubemlent overall, low-convex over each seed, when ripe breaking up into 4-7, 6-11 individually indehiscent articles 3-4.5 mm long; seeds (Harley 19069, K, NY) transverse, compressed-rhombic-obovoid ±3.5 x 2.6 mm, the brownish-olivaceous testa smooth except for a few dimples near middle of faces, the areole ±1.3 X 1.1 mm.
In cerrado, on shallow stony soils at ±500 m, known in typical form only from Sa. do A9uma near 42°40-45'W in n.-centr. Bahia, and in a form with relatively short lvs from Sento Se, downstream in the S. Francisco valley at 41°10'W and in s.-e. Piaui near S. Raimundo Nonato.— Fl.
XII-III(-?).
In the protologue Harms referred M. ulbrichiana to ser. Asperatae and suggested an aflinity to M. paludosa Benth.
Its trimerous flowers, broad spinule-tipped stipules and absence of paraphyllidia point to a much closer relationship with M. misera and M. cordistipula and their close allies, from all of which M. ulbrichiana differs in relatively numerous leaflets per pinna.
It bears a rather striking superficial resemblance to some forms of M paraguariae M. Micheli, a distantly aUopatric species technically dissimilar in tetramerous flowers and dilated paraphyllidia.
It seems likely that the epithet commemorates Eberhard Ulbrich (1879-1952), Harms's colleague at Dahlem.
FIG 12.
Mimosa minarum Bameby.
A. Flowering stem.
B. Leaflet, dorsal view.
C. Rower.
D. Pods.
E. Seed. (A-C from Irwin 23540; D, E from Irmn 23022.) 174.
Mimosa minarum Bameby, sp. nov., foliis angustis simul pluriet brevi-pinnatis M. brevipinnam certe affinem simulans, sed foliolis minimis 2-3 X 0.6-1 (nec 3^.5 x 1.6- 2) mm usque capitulisque minoribus 4-5 (nec 6-7) mm diam. recedens, a proxime aflini M. guaranitica petiolis communibus plerisque 3 - 6 (nec 2-3) cm longis pinnisque 6-12 (nec 4- 6)-jugis diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: ±15 km w. of Grao Mogol, 950 m, 19.11.1969 (fl), H. S. Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 2i5^0.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Fig.
12.
Functionally herbaceous subshrubs 3-1 dm with stiff* few-branched stems ascending from woody rootstock, except for glabrous faces of lfts and glabrous corollas viscid-villosulous throughout with fine erect gland-tipped setulae 0.5-1.2 mm intermixed with underlying pubemlence (sometimes almost lacking) and few, randomly scattered yellowish setaculei to 1 mm, the foliage olivaceous concolorous, the small plane lfts resinously lustrous on both faces, thinly glandularfimbriolate, the globose capitula solitary and geminate in distal If-axils on peduncle subequaling or shortly surpassing the subtending If.
Stipules thinly herbaceous ovateor broadly lance-acuminate 2-4.5 x 1.2-2.5 mm, 2-5- nerved from base, the stout midrib excurrent as a mucro, the lateral nerves much shorter.
Leafstalks (2.5-)3-6.5 cm, the petiole 3-12(-14) x 0.4-0.5 mm, less than twice as long as the interpinnal segments, these 3-8 mm; no interpinnal spicules; pinnae 6-10(-12)-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones (5-)6- 12 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (8-)9-l 3(-14)-jug., little decrescent at each end of pinnae, the first pair 0.5- 0.9 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades oblong or oblong-eUiptic obtuse from shallowly semicordate base, the longer ones (1.3-)1.5-3(-3.3) X 0.6-1 mm, 2-3(-3.3) times as long as wide, the centric midrib sometimes faintly discernible beneath but fully immersed, the blade otherwise glabrous.
Peduncles (2-)2.5- 4 cm; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts minute caducous; flowers 3-merous 6-androus, the proximal ones a little shorter, the distal ones alone bisexual; calyx membranous 0.4-0.5 mm, its tmncate rim either glabrous or with 1-3 minute gland-tipped setulae; corolla turbinate membranous glabrous 2-2.7 mm, the lobes 0.8-1 X 0.75- 1 mm, at tip a little thickened but scarcely concave; filaments pink, monadelphous through ±0.5 mm, exserted 5-6.5 mm; ovary minutely glandular.
Pods 1-4 per capitulum, linear, straight or nearly so, 25-32 x 3.5-4 mm, 5-8-seeded, at base cuneately contracted into a stipe 1-2.5 mm, apiculate at apex, the coarse, shallowly undulate replum 0.6-0.7 mm wide, the papery valves lowcolliculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike finely glandular-setulose but the setulae of the latter in part longer whitish, a little dilated at base and hispid-setiform, the free-faUing, individually dehiscent articles eUiptic-oblong 4-5.5 mm long; seeds (few seen) basipetal, compressedobovoid ±3.5 X 2.5 mm, the dull brown testa minutely pitted.
In sandy or stony campo at 900-1200 m, local near the crests of serras do Cabral and do Espinhafo in lat. 16°30'-18°S in n.-centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil (Cristalia; between Francisco Sa and Grao Mogol; e. of Itacambira).—Fl.
XI-III. Mimosa minarum is closely related to M. misera, M. guaranitica and M. brevipinna, but has its own particular leaf-formula, short proper petiole and narrow leaf-outline, and an apparently compact allopatric area of dispersal in campo mpestre on the crest of Sa. do Espinha^o and that of the detached Sa. do Cabral.
It is the only member of its group known hitherto from Minas Gerais.
The morphological diff*erentiation of this whole series is not strong, and as material accumulates the taxonomic status of its members will need reassessment.
175.
Mimosa morroensis Bameby, Brittonia 37: 147, fig. 10.
1985.-"BrazU.
Bahia: 22 km W of Morro do Chapeu, 22 Feb 1971 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Harley & G. L. Smith) 50675."-Holotypus, UB!; isotypi, K! NY! US! Fig.
13.
Unarmed, functionally herbaceous subshrubs with simple, pliantly humifuse stems 3-10 dm radiating from knotty rootstock, viscid-villosulous throughout with erect tapering gland-tipped setae of diflerent lengths (±0.5-1.5 mm) commonly mixed with fine gray pubemlence, the olivaceous foliage concolorous, the plane firm lfts resinously sublustrous, the globose capitula solitary in distal If-axils on peduncle ± as long as subtending If.
Stipules mostly reflexed, broadly triangular-ovate-acuminate 2-5 x 1.5-2.5 mm, 3-5-nerved, the midrib excurrent as a yellowish, stiff but not vulnerant mucro.
Leaf-stalks 3.5-5 cm, the petiole 12-23 x 0.4-0.7 mm, 2.5-5 times as long as the interpinnal segments, these 3-5 mm; pinnae 6-9-jug., the rachis of longer ones 10-17 mm; interpinnal spicules 0; lfts of longer pinnae (13-)15-18(-19)-jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair ± 1 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades narrowly oblong obtuse from shallowly semicordate base, those near mid-rachis 3.5-4 x 1-1.2 mm, ±3-3.5 times as long as wide, the blades veinless above, beneath 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib weakly pinnate-branched.
Peduncles 3-4.5 cm; capitula without filaments 6- 6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-lanceolate 0.9-1.3 x 0.2 mm, glandularfimbriolate; flowers 3-merous 6-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx membranous campanulate ±0.2 mm, glabrous extemally, the tmncate rim with 2-3 minute gland-tipped setulae; corolla 2.8-3 mm, narrowly turbinate, the ovate 1-nerved lobes ±1.4 x 1 mm, thinly glandularsetulose extemally; filaments pinkish-lavender, monadelphous through ±0.3 mm below the glandular-setulose ovary, exserted 4-6 mm.
Pods (few seen) narrowly oblong in profile ±20 x 4.5 mm, cuneately contracted at base into a stipe 1 mm, acuminate at apex, 2-3-seeded, the shallowly undulate replum ±0.5 mm wide, the papery stramineous valves elevated over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely glandularsetulose overall, the free-falling articles 4-5 mm long; seeds not seen. rrvorrrcye-rt/si^ FIG. 13.
Mimosa morroensis Bameby.
A. Rootstock and upper part offloweringstem.
B. Stem-node, showing stipules and gland-tipped setae.
C. Leaflet, dorsal view.
D. Bract + flower. (All from Irwin 30678.) In caatinga scmb on sandy soil associated with arenitic outcrops, ±1000 m, known only from Chapada Diamantina near Morro do Chapeu, 11°30'S in centr. upland Bahia, BrazU. - F l . (?-)IIII.
Mimosa morroensis is distinguished from immediate relatives by the syndrome of flexuously humifuse stems, relatively long petioles, and narrow crowded pinnae.
Mimosa ulbrichiana, known to occur only a short distance to the northwest of Morro do Chapeu, is a stiffly branched shmblet with longer pinna-rachises and an elongate 6- 11 -seeded pod.
Distantly allopatric M. brevipinna resembles M. morroensis in proportionately long petioles, but the pinnae are shorter and more distant, and the leaflets fewer, broader, and essentially veinless.
Mimosa minarum, found in similar campo mpestre environment more than 600 km airline south of Morro do Chapeu in Minas Gerais, has petioles no longer than the first interpinnal segment of the leaf-stalk and shorter, more distant pinnae, the whole leaf-outline being consequently at once longer and proportionately narrower.
The foregoing description is based on the typecollection only.
Fragments of BRADE 37439 (=Duarte & Pereira 9192/10102, NY) from Morro de Chapeu, of which the greater part is M. cordistipula, are probably referable to M. morroensis, but have shorter, more scabrous indumentum of glandular setulae only ±0.2-0.6 mm long. 176.
Mimosa brevipinna Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 432.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 371, descr. ampliat.
1876.-"Habitat in pascuis agrestibus ad Oeiras provinciae Piauhiensis: Martius."
—Holotypus, collected V.1819 (fl), M (2 sheets)! = F Neg. 6775 = IPA Neg. 1342.
Subshrubs from woody rootstock with mostly simple diffuse stems 3-6 dm, except for glabrous or weakly ciliolate lfts viscid-villosulous and hispid throughout with minute white hairs, glandtipped setulae to 0.35-0.5 mm, and erect yellowish setaculei to 0.7-2 mm, the lvs concolorous, the firm plane veinless lfts brown when dry, the globose capitula mostly geminate in distal If-axils.
Stipules ovate or broadly lanceolate 2.5-4.5 X 1.5-2 mm, coarsely 2-nerved, the midrib excurrent as a yellowish mucro, the blade becoming dry, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (3-)4-8 cm, the petiole (1.2-)1.5-2.5(-3.2) X 0.5-0.7 mm, 2-3.5 times as long as the first interpinnal segment, this and succeeding ones to 4-10 mm; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae 5-9-jug., a little accrescent upward, the rachis of distal pair 5-11 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-1 mm; lfts of distal pair of pinnae 6-10(-l l)-jug., Uttle graduated, the first pair 1.5-2.5 mm from pulvinus, the blades oblong-obovate from shallowly semicordate base, very obtuse, the distal ones 3-4.5 x 1.6-2 mm, 1.6-2.8 times as long as wide.
Peduncles 3-4.5 cm; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam.; bracts minute; flowers sessile or almost so, mostly 3-merous but few 4-merous, all diplostemonous, only the distal ones of the capitulum bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.4 x 0.4 mm, the subtmncate rim either glabrous or with 1-2 minute gland-tipped setulae; corollas turbinate 2.8-3.2 mm, glabrous, the ovate 1-nerved reddish-tipped lobes 1.1-1.3 x 1-1.2 mm; filaments (presumably pink) weakly monadelphous at very base, exserted 5-6 mm; ovary shortly stipitate, glandular-pubemlent; the pod unknown.
In pasture land near 200 m, known only from valley of rio Caninde near Oeiras, Piaui, Brazil.-Fl.
V-VI, but the season doubtless controlled by rainfall.
Bentham chanced to notice on the type-collection of M. brevipinna only tetramerous flowers, but trimerous ones prevail, and the broad stipules mucronate by a stout excurrent midrib likewise indicate close relationship to other constantly or at least characteristically trimerous mimosas of northeastern Brazil, in particular to M. misera, M. setuligera, M. borboremae, M. xiquexiquensis and M. morroensis.
Within this group M. brevipinna most closely resembles M. xiquexiquensis, M. setuligera and M. borboremae in relatively long leaf-stalks and numerous short pinnae, a leaf-formula that recalls tetramerous M. gracilis var. gracilis.
It differs from the first of these three in capitellate (not spicate) infforescences, from the last in simply mucronate and marginally entire (not spinulose-fimbriate) stipules, and less securely from M. setuligera (q.v.) by differences in dispersal and relative proportions of setae and viscid setulae.
177.
Mimosa hirsuticaulis Harms, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 42: 206.
1908.-"Bahia: Taboleiro bei Remanso (ULE n. 7389-Jan. 1907)."-Holotypus, +B = F Neg. 1416\; isotypi, G! HBG! K! L! M! Functionally herbaceous subshrubs with pliantly humifuse or perhaps weakly assurgent, simple or few-branched, distantly foliate stems ± 5- 7 dm, except for glabrous faces of olivaceous concolorous lfts densely finely viscid-hirsute throughout with lustrous horizontal, minutely gland-tipped setae to ±1.5-2 mm, the globose capitula on long slender peduncles axillary to and longer than the hysteranthously or coevally expanding lvs, the young inflorescence efoliate in praefloration but becoming leafy in fmit.
Stipules either ascending or early deflexed, broadly ovatetriangular-acuminate 2.5-4 X 2-3 mm, setose dorsally, glabrous within, flabeUately 7-11-nerved from base, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (2.5-)3-5 cm, the petiole (1.5-)2-3.7 cm x 0.5-0.7 mm, the ventral sulcus obscure, the interpinnal segments (1—)2-7 mm, the petiole proper 2-3 times as long as rachis; spicules 0; pinnae 3^-jug., subaccrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 13- 30 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 12-16-jug., scarcely graduated in size, the first pair 2-4 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades oblong or oblong-eUiptic obtuse, the longer ones (3-)4-7 X (0.7-) 1-2.4 mm, 2.4-4 times as long as wide, all 3(-4)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib moderately displaced, the posterior inner nerve brochidodrome beyond mid-blade, the outer one(s) short and weak, the venulation only bluntly prominulous.
Peduncles solitary and 2- 3 together, 4-8 cm; capitula without filaments 8-9 mm diam., prior to anthesis glandular-hirsutulous substrobiliform; bracts Unear-oblanceolate 2-^ X 0.3-0.4 mm, dorsally and marginally viscid-setulose; pedicels 0.1-0.2 mm; calyx membranous campanulate 0.3-0.5 mm, the subtmncate rim either glabrous or with 1-2 random gland-tipped setulae; flowers 3-merous 6-androus, some lower ones staminate; corollas narrowly vase-shaped 3.5-4 mm, the membranous, broadly ovate 1-nerved lobes thinly barbeUate dorsally at tip but eglandular; filaments weakly monadelphous through 1-1.5 mm, the longer ones exserted 8-9 mm.
Pods solitary or few per capitulum, in profile linear acute ±28 x 4.5 mm, at base attenuate into a stipe ±7 mm, the shallowly undulate replum 0.35-0.5 mm wide, finely viscid-setulose like foliage, the valves densely hispid with straight erect-ascending, microscopically barbellate stramineous setae to ±2 mm, not seen ripe, the dehiscence therefore unknown.
In the taboleiro formation in the lower S. Francisco vaUey, near 9°40'S in n. Bahia, Brazil; known only from the type-locality near Remanso.—Fl.
XII-II(-?).
Mimosa hirsuticaulis resembles M. morroensis in humistrate stems and in relatively long petioles, but the leaves have only half as many pinnae.
From the meager example available the pod appears to have a much longer stipe (±7, not ± 1 mm).
Monadelphy of the filaments through more than 1 mm, as described from two isotypi, requires confirmation from new collections.
178.
Mimosa setuligera Harms, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 42: 208.
1908.-"Bahia: Taboleiro bei Remanso (ULE n. 7388-Jan. 1907)."-Holotypus, +B = F Neg. 14371; isotypi, G! HBG! K! = NY Neg. 11646.
Functionally herbaceous subshrub with slender, pliantly humifuse, simple or few-branched, distantly foliate stems attaining ± 1 m, these with petioles and peduncles at once viscid-villosulous and hispid with minute pallid simple hairs, erect gland-tipped setulae to ±0.4-0.6 mm, and horizontally spreading yellowish plain setae to 2-3 mm, the small firm concolorous lfts either glabrous or dorsally finely villosulous, the globose capitula long-pedunculate in distal If-axils, ascending to meridian.
Stipules deflexed, lanceolate or ovate, abmptly acuminate ±3-5 x 1.2- 2 mm, hirsutulous on both faces, setose-ciliolate, coarsely 1-3-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 3-6 cm subterete, the petiole including livid pulvinus 11-17 mm, at middle 0.4-0.5 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 2-8 mm, thinly setose but otherwise glabrate; no interpinnal spicules; pinnae (6-)8-l 1-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of distal ones 6-11 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.7 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 9- 12(-13)-jug., subequilong, closely imbricate, the first pair 1-1.5 mm distant from a pair of setae on top of pulvinus, the blades narrowly oblongobovate obtuse 2-3 x 0.9-1.2 mm, ±2-3 times as long as wide, veinless on both faces or the midrib weakly discolored dorsally but not raised.
Peduncles solitary or geminate ±4-5 cm; capitula without filaments 7-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts oblanceolate ± 1 mm, dorsally pubemlent; y7(?w^r5 3(-4)-merous diplostemonous, some small proximal ones staminate; pedicels ±0.2 mm; calyx campanulate ±0.6 mm, glandular-pubemlent extemally; bisexual corollas vase-shaped ±2.9-3.5 mm, the faintly 1-nerved lobes 1-1.4 x 1 mm, beyond middle thinly minutely hispidulous and viscid-setulose; filaments (presumably pink) shortly monadelphous around base of pistil, exserted ±5.5 mm; ovary obscurely puberulent.
Pods (scarcely known) ±65 x 6 mm, the replum hispid.
In taboleiro ±300—400 m, known only from lower S. Francisco valley near 9°40'S in n. Bahia (Petrolina; Joazeiro, Remanso), and from adj. Piaui (Sa. do Cavalheiro).-n. I-V. This elegant prostrate mimosa is clearly akin to M. brevipinna and M. borboremae, perhaps not specifically distinct from the former, with which it agrees closely in the entire mucronate stipules, in leaf-formula, and in the random tetramerous flowers.
The weak differential characters that distinguish M. setuligera from M. brevipinna are found in length and dispersal on the plant of epidermal outgrowths: dense hispid pubescence of the perhaps weaker and longer stems; pinna-rachises glabrous except for a peculiar pair of setae arising from points occupied in most tetramerous Mimosae by the paraphyllidia (modified leaflets); and viscid-hispidulous calyx and corolla-lobes.
At present M. brevipinna is known only from the type and M. setuligera only from the type and one modem collection (Heringer & al. 364, NY), so it is too early to assess the significance of the characters, which may prove variable.
The disparity in length of peduncle to the associated leaf, thought by Harms to be distinctive, is unlikely to prove a dependable character in the context of this group.
179.
Mimosa borboremae Harms [ex Luetzelburg, Estud. bot. Nordeste 2: 79. nomen nudum], Notizbl.
Bot. Gart.
Berlin-Dahlem 8: 711.
1924.-"Brasilien: Parahyba do Norte, [on rio Serido], Serra Borborema, Jardim-Parelhas (Ph. von Luetzelburg n. 12455)."
— Holotypus, +B; isotypus, M! = IPA Neg. 1343 = NY Neg. 11548.
M. coelho-de-moraesii Pickel & Handro ex Pickel, Arq. Bot. Estado Sao Paulo 3(4): 205, t. 51.
1958.—"Estado da Paraiba: Esperanza, 28/8/1956.
Leg. Jayme CoelhodeMoraes 1779.-Typus.. .SP. ..55606.''- Not seen, but the protologue explicit.
Slender unarmed, decumbent or ascending, diffusely branched, weakly suffrutescent herbs 6-10 1991] B A R N E B Y : SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 277 dm, the lustrous brown smooth stems glabrous or proximally glabrate, distally together with some branchlets and lf-stks charged with scattered erect slender gland-tipped setae to ±0.5-2 mm, the delicate diminutive foliage olivaceous concolorous, the lfts minutely pubemlent dorsally where exposed in sleep but otherwise glabrous, the globose capitula solitary or geminate in the axil of coetaneous lvs and mostly a little longer than them.
Stipules membranous, without marginal appendages broadly ovate or deltate 1.5-5 x 1.5- 3.5 mm, palmately 5-7-nerved and the centric costa often 1 -branched beyond middle, each primary and secondary vein excurrent as a glabrous mucro 0.5-1.5 mm, the margin between them gray-ciliolate.
Leaf-stalks 3-8 cm, tapering distally, the terete petiole 10-17 mm, at middle 0.2- 0.6 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 5-9(- 11) mm, obscurely depressed ventrally; spicules 0; pinnae (4-)5-9-jug., equilong or subaccrescent upward, the rachis 4-11 mm, the first pair at or near mid-rachis, 1.5-6 mm distant from livid pulvinus, the interfoliolar segments 0.3-1 mm, paraphyllidia 0; lfts 5-7-jug., suberectly imbricate in sleep, oblanceolate or narrowly obovate from narrowly semicordate base, obtuse at apex, those at mid-rachis 2-5 x 0.8-2.2 mm, all veinless except for filiform costa discolored but not raised beneath.
Peduncles (3-)4-8.5 cm, strongly ribbed; capitula without filaments ±5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid fl-buds glabrous; bracts subfilamentous ±0.2 mm; pedicels 0.3-0.8 mm; flowers 3-merous 6-androus (but according to Pickel occasionally 4-merous); calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate 0.3- 0.4 mm, the erose rim minutely ciliolate; corollas turbinate 2.3-3 mm, the membranous 1-nerved, almost plane lobes 1-1.4 x 1-1.3 mm; filaments pink, free to base or almost so, strongly dilated in distal V5, exserted 5.5-7.5 mm.
Pods (few seen, described in part from protologue of M. coelhode-moraesii.
I.e.) several per capitulum, sessile, undulately linear-oblong in profile, gently decurved, ±(12-) 15-20 X 4 mm, 3-5-seeded, the glandular valves separating when ripe from smooth replum and breaking up into rhombicelliptic biconvex articles ±4 mm long. In unrecorded habitats but to be expected in caatinga at ±300-550 m, seldom collected, known only from s. Rio Grande do Norte (Serid6 valley), w. Paraiba (Esperanfa, Bayeux), and n.- centr. Pemambuco (between Triunfo and Flores, 40°30'W), to be sought in adj. states of n.-e. BrazU.—Fl.
IV-V, VIII(-?), according to von Luetzelburg only following rains.
A delicately smaU-leaved, essentially herbaceous mimosa, M. borboremae is instantly distinguished from all trimerous diplostemonous kindred by its dilated stipules fimbriate by excurrent nerves.
The earliest known (but not dated) collection, Houllet s.n. (M, P) from Pemambuco, was doubtfully identified by Bentham as M. gracilis, which may have somewhat similar foliage but combined with entire stipules and tetramerous flowers.
180.
Mimosa cordistipula Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 411.
1842.-"Serra Jacobina [Bahia, Brazil], Blanchet, n. 2597."—Holotypus, K! = NY Negs.
1872, 11665; isotypi, BM! F! = F Neg. 54823,.
G! = F Neg. 28204, NY! P!W! M. cordistipula sensu Bentham, 1875: 431, 1876: 368; Lewis, 1987, fig. 7H, J. Awkwardly branched depressed or ascending shrublets 1.5-7(-10) dm, the old stems scaly with marcescent stipules or lf-stks, the homotinous ones densely leafy and villous with fine white spreading hairs to 0.8-1.3 mm often but not always mixed with shorter fine gland-tipped setulae, the foliage similarly but more thinly pubescent and the lf-stks sometimes remotely aculeolate, the small glossy thick-textured lfts glabrous or almost so facially, ciliolate or glandular-ciliolate, the globose capitula from a few distal If-axils, well exserted from foliage.
Stipules ovateor lance-acuminate from subcordate base, 2.5-5.5 X 1-2 mm, the stout, dorsally prominulous midrib excurrent as a yellowish spinule, the 2-3 lateral nerves much weaker.
Leafstalks stiff 6-23 mm, attenuate beyond last pair of pinnae into a yellowish spinule, the petiole 1-4 mm, the longer interpinnal segments l-3(-4.5) mm; spicules 0, but minute livid granules subtending the pulvini of pinnae; pinnae 3-, 3-4-, 4-7-jug., the rachis (5-)7-14 mm, at apex spinulose like Ifstk, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1 mm; paraphyllidia 0; lfts 7-9-, 10-12-jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis, in sleep imbricate obliquely upward, the longer ones narrowly oblong or oblong-eUiptic obtuse 2-3 X 0.6-1.1 mm, all centrically 1-nerved dorsally.
Peduncles ascending 2-5.5 cm, sometimes divaricate after anthesis; capitula without filaments 5.5-7.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis either moriform or incipiently conelike, the bracts sometimes projecting from between fl-buds; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1-3.5 mm, usually membranous flaccid, but the midrib sometimes indurated; flowers 3-merous 6-androus, the lower ones staminate, the rest bisexual; calyx 0.5-0.7 mm, the short teeth sometimes thinly ciliolate; corolla membranous, narrowly turbinate or vase-shaped 2.8-3.2 mm, the ovate lobes 0.9-1.5 mm, at cucullate apex callous-thickened and extemally villosulous; filaments pink, monadelphous at base through less than 0.5 mm, exserted 5-6 mm.
Pods mostly 1-2 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile linear straight 25-30 x 3.5-4 mm, the shallowly undulate replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, the firmly papery, densely pubemlent valves lowcolliculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into 5-7(-8) free-falling articles ±4.5 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In campo mpestre or occurring as an element of depauperate caatinga scmb in shallow soils on sandstone outcrops, 1000-1150 m, local on the heights of Chapada Diamantina between lat. ± 11°-13°30'S in interior Bahia, from Sa. da Jacobina s. through Sa. do Tombador to Sa. do Sincora.-F. I-VI. A species of marked character, notable for xeromorphic shmbby habit, broad stipules, small crowded leaves, and especially for the spinulose tip of stipules, leaf-stalks and pinnae.
Even in its restricted range M. cordistipula exhibits a diversity of indumentum characteristic of many much more widely dispersed members of the genus.
While the stems and foliage are constantly villous in varying density, on Sa. da Jacobina they are also glandular-setulose and the leaf-stalks are dorsally aculeolate.
On Sa. do Sincora pin-glands and prickles are entirely wanting.
On intervening Sa. do Tombador, within a radius of 20 km of Morro do Chapeu, the several known populations vary from both glandular and prickly (Irwin 32348, NY) or glandular but not prickly (Mori & Boom 14522, NY) to neither glandular nor prickly (Irwin 32650, NY).
In Flora brasiliensis Bentham described the flower of M. cordistipula as tetramerous, but voiced the suspicion that they should be trimerous as in related species.
I have found none but trimerous flowers in the isotype at NY or in any of seven modem collections studied.
181.
Mimosa blanchetii Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 433.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 372, char, ampliat.
1876.-"Habitat ad Moritiba in Serra da Jacobina provinciae Bahiensis: Blanchet n. 3679."—Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)! isotypi, ^B = F Neg. 1306\ BM! C! F! = F Neg. 54809, G (4 sheets)! M! MO! P!W! M. blanchetii sensu Lewis, 1987, fig. 9G. Stiffly erect or ascending unarmed spindly shrubs or shrublets 3.5-20 dm, the stems often at first virgate but openly few-branched distally, the branchlets and foliage at once minutely pubemlent and with few scattered or with many crowded gland-tipped setulae to 0.1-0.3 mm, but the lfts sometimes glabrous, the globose capitula axillary to distal lvs or sometimes, late in growing season, forming a shortly exserted pseudoraceme.
Stipules firm, lanceor narrowly ovateacuminate 2.5-5 X 0.6-1.5 mm, either dorsally pubemlent or only ciliolate, the strong, dorsally prominent midrib excurrent as a stiff" yellowish spinule.
Leaf-stalks stiffly ascending, those of primary cauline lvs 4.5-10 cm, of some distal lvs (no further described) shorter, the petiole 0- 6 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 2-4 mm, the terminal appendage short, not spinulose; spicules 0, but a cluster of granules at base of pulvini; pinnae (12-)15-30-jug., their rachis 2- 4 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.1-0.6 mm; lfts imbricately ascending 6-9-jug. (paraphyllidia 0), those at mid-rachis slightly larger than the rest, all obovate or oblong-obovate obtuse or subtmncate, slightly arched forward, the longest 1.2-3.2 x 0.6-1.2 mm, extemally nerveless.
Peduncles solitary and distally fasciculate by 2-5, 2-3.5 cm, usually much surpassed by the subtending If; capitula without filaments 5.5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts spatulate ±0.5 mm; calyx membranous campanulate subtmncate glabrous 0.45-0.6 mm; corollas mostly 3-, randomly 4-merous, turbinate-campanulate 2.6-3.2 mm, the ovate, apically cucullate, extemally either glabrous or minutely stipitate-glandular lobes 1.2-1.5 mm; filaments pink, free to base or almost so, exserted ±5 mm.
Pods 1-5 per capitulum, subsessile or contracted at base into a stipe 2-3 mm, the body broadly linear in profile, straight or subdecurved, when well fertUized 19-30 x 5-7 mm, the shallowly undulate replum ±0.5 mm wide, the papery brown valves low-colliculate over each seed, at once densely pubemlent overall and hispid with stramineous or (Harley 19352, K, NY) crimson gland-tipped setae to 1-1.5 mm, when ripe breaking up into 3-5 free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 4-5 mm long; seeds (not seen fully ripe) ±3.5 x 3 mm.
In sand-filled pockets of sandstone outcrops and in caatinga scmb-thickets, 980-1150 m, locally plentiful on the heights of Chapada Diamantina between lat. 10°20' and 11°40'S in n. centr. Bahia, on serras da Boa Vista, da Jacobina, do Curral Feio, and do Tombador.—Fl.
I-VI (-IX), perhaps intermittently through the year.
Among planaltine diplostemonous mimosas M. blanchetii is eminently singular in its proportionately long and narrow leaves consisting of as many as thirty pairs of pinnae not more than six millimeters in length.
Bentham associated it provisionally with the potentially multiand brevi-pinnate M. gracilis, but suspected that its tme affinity lay elsewhere.
Mimosa gracilis has tetramerous flowers and usually herbaceous stems.
The woody stems of M. blanchetii, the spinulose stipules, the thick-textured veinless leaflets, and the mostly (in many plants uniformly) trimerous flowers collectively suggest a much closer kinship to sympatric M. cordistipula, which differs, however, in dissimilar leaf-formula (only 3-7 pairs of pinnae) and in spinescent tips of leaf-stalk and pinna-rachises.
182.
Mimosa xiquexiquensis Bameby [in Lewis, Leg. Bahia 143.
1987, nomen nudum], sp. nov., inter affines imprimis flosculis spicatis (nec capitatis) et foliomm elongatomm angustorum pinnis abbreviatis multijugis praestans.— Brazil.
Bahia: sand dunes with low forest and cacti, ±25 m, ±4-5 km n. of Xique-xique on w. side of rio S. Francisco, 5.
IV.1976 (fl, fr), G. Davidse (with T. P. Ramamoorthy & D. M. Vital) 11980.-Holotypus, MO 3216932 = NY Neg. 12078.
Microphyllidious subshrub with widely spreading, remotely branched stems to ± 5 dm, except for upper face of lfts densely viscid-villosulous throughout with minute plain incurved hairs and fine erect gland-tipped setulae 0.1-0.25 mm, the If-axes in addition charged with random erect weak setaculei to 0.3 mm, the proportionately long and narrow lvs olivaceous subconcolorous, the fl-spikes solitary and geminate in Ifaxils on peduncle shorter than subtending If.
Stipules spreading herbaceous, triangular or broadly lanceolate 3-5 x 1,5-2 mm, bluntly 1 -nerved dorsaUy, becoming dry deciduous.
Leafstalks (4-)4.5-8 cm, obscurely sulcate, the petiole 6-17 X 0.4-0.8 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 3.5-5 mm; spicules 0; pinnae 10-19-jug., subequilong, the rachis 6-11 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.5 mm; lfts 12-16-jug., the first pair 0.5-1 mm distant from Hvid pulvinus (paraphyUidia 0), the blades narrowly oblong or oblong-oblanceolate, very obtuse, the larger ones 1.7-2.5 x 0.5-0.8 mm, 2.3-4 times as long as wide, nerveless on both faces.
Peduncles 2.5-4 cm; spikes loose, the axis of receptacle becoming 10-22 mm; bracts submembranous linear-oblanceolate 0.3-0.4 mm, mostly deciduous; flowers subsessile, 3-merous 6-androus, all bisexual; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.3 mm, the depressed-deltate teeth ±0.1 mm, minutely ciliolate; corolla narrowly turbinate 2.1-2.4 mm, the erect ovate, weakly 1-nerved, almost plane lobes 1-1.2 X 0.7-0.8 mm, thinly pubemlent dorsally; filaments (presumably pink) free to base, exserted ±2 mm; ovary densely viscid-puberulent.
Pods ascending stipitate, the stipe 1-A mm, the undulately linear straight body when well fertilized 25-30 x 4.5-5 mm, 5-6-seeded, the constricted replum 0.6-0.7 mm wide, attenuate distally into an erect cusp 1.5-2 mm, the papery valves low-convex over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely minutely viscid-puberulent overall, the valves when ripe separating from replum and narrowly gaping on adaxial side but not or only tardily and randomly articulate; seeds obovoid, compressed but plump, in broad profile ±4 X 2.7 mm, the smooth testa pale pinkish-brown.
In dry sandy ground near 25 m, known only from the left bank of rio S. Francisco a few km upstream from Xique-xique, near 11°S in n.-w. Bahia, BrazU.-H. ± II-IV. The spicate inflorescence of M. xiquexiquensis distinguishes it from all close relatives.
Its long narrow multipinnate leaves are intermediate in form between those of M. brevipinna and M. blanchetii, in size of pinnae and leaflets resembling those of the former, but in number of pinnae those of the latter.
The peculiar dehiscence of the pod, as described above, needs confirmation from further collections.
B(xxii).
Series CAMPICOLAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Campicolae Barneby, ser. nov., inter ser. Filipedes et ser. Ceratonias ambigentes, cum ambabus floribus trimeris congruae, ab illis pinnis plurijugis (nec conjugatis), ab his imprimis craspedio articulato (nec valvatim dehiscenti) diversae.—Sp. typica: M. campicola Harms.
Shrubs and diffuse subshrubs 3-20 dm armed on stems and lf-stks with scattered recurved aculei.
Indumentum of small plain hairs and often some granular trichomes, eglandular, setose only on pod.
Stipules lance-setiform 1 -nerved.
Leafformula ii-vii/(5-)6-17, the longer blades 5-10 mm, the If-stk either spiculate or not.
Inflorescence pseudoracemose only in early anthesis, the peduncles subtended by early hysteranthous lvs, or axillary from the hrst;flowers 3-merous; calyx 0.3-0.7 mm, the rim obscurely denticulate, subtmncate, or (in M. hortensis) lobulate, the coroUa 2-3.2 mm; filaments white or pink, obscurely monadelphous at very base.
Pods sessile or nearly so, Unear-oblong or linear in profile, 4-10 mm wide, (4-)6-10-seeded, the usually setose replum 0.3-0.8 mm diam., the valves disarticulating.
Spp. three, of interior Bahia and Minas Gerais, Brazil.
In morphological detail the three species of ser. Campicolae, none of which were known to Bentham, fall midway between ser. Ceratoniae and ser. Filipedes, and appear very closely allied to both.
They differ from Ceratoniae in relatively microphyllidious leaves and particularly in a proportionately narrow, disarticulating (not broad valvate) craspedium; and from Filipedes in plurijugate, not exactly conjugate pinnae.
The otherwise similar ser. Paucifoliatae is distinguished by tetramerous flowers.
Conspectus of ser. Campicolae Mimosa 183. campicola Harms a. var. planipes Bameby b. var. campicola 183bis. hortensis Bamehy 184. pabstiana Bameby Key to species of ser. Campicolae I. Weakly frutescent or essentially herbaceous 3-10 dm; pinnae 2-4-jug., the rachis of longer ones 9-22 mm; lfts to 6-11-jug.; filaments pink; Chapada Diamantina and lower S. Francisco valley in n.-centr. Bahia.
2.
Lf-stks 1.5-5.5 cm, charged with interpinnal spicules, the interpinnal segments of rachis 3-9 mm; pod subsessile, the body 25-55 x 4-8 mm, the valves commonly glabrous or simply villosulous, sometimes thinly hispid-setulose, the individual articles 2-9 mm long. ... 183.
M. campicola (p. 280).
2.
Lf-stks 4.5-7.5 cm, espiculate, the interpinnal segments of rachis 10-20 mm; pod stoutly stipitate, the stipe 2.5-6 mm, the body 55-90 x 9-10 mm, the valves densely coarsely hispid overall, the individual articles 10-12 mm long 183bis.
M hortensis (p. 282).
1.
Fruticose or fmtescent 1-2 m; pinnae 5-7-jug., the rachis of longer ones 21-33 mm; lfts to 12-17-jug.; filaments white; centr. Minas Gerais 184.
M. pabstiana (p. 283).
183.
Mimosa campicola Harms, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 42: 206.
1908.—Typus infra sub var. campicola indicatur.
Procumbent or diffiisely assurgent, weakly suffmtescent subshrubs (2.5-)3-10 dm or perhaps sometimes taller, the distally branched, prominently 4-5-ribbed pith-filled stems and the dorsal and lateral ribs of the often (but inconsistently) proximally dilated lf-stks armed with recurved yellowish aculei to 0.3-2 mm and in addition either minutely incurved-pubemlent or pilose with fine subhorizontal eglandular hairs to 0.25-1.2 mm, sometimes further charged with minute livid granules, the lfts varying from glabrous to minutely ciliolate or thinly pubemlent dorsally, the small globose capitula at first axillary and immersed in foliage, some later ones pseudoracemose and shortly exserted.
Stipules erect or incurved-ascending, linearor lance-attenuate 2.5-6 mm, strongly 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 1.5-5.5 cm, either slender and normally 3-ribbed or dorsoventrally compressed and proximally dilated, near base 0.4-2 mm wide, the petiole 7-43 mm, the longer or longest interpinnal segment (2-)3-9 mm; an acicular spicule (rarely 2) between each pair of pinnae; pinnae 2-, 2-3-, or 3-4-jug., the rachis of distal ones 5- 22 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-2.5 mm; lfts (5-)6-9-, less commonly 7-11-jug., the first pair 0.6-1.7 mm distant from minute subulate paraphyllidia, the blades oblong or oblongobovate from shallowly semicordate base, broadly obtuse or subapiculate, the longer (distal) ones 4-10 x (l_)l.4-3.6(-4) mm, aU redmargined, veinless above, beneath faintly 1-2- nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric, the posterior nerve, when present, short and weak.
Peduncles solitary or geminate 5-30 mm; capitula without filaments 5-5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse, dark purple flbuds either hispidulous or subglabrous; bracts membranous linear-oblanceolate 0.4-0.8 x 0.1- 1.2 mm, minutely ciliolate or livid-granular, subpersistent;flowers 3-merous 6-androus, the lowest staminate and slightly smaller than the bisexual ones; calyx 0.3—0.6 mm; corolla turbinate-vaseshaped 2-3.2 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave 1-nerved, apically callous lobes 0.7-1.3 x 0.5- 0.85 mm; filaments bright pink, monadelphous through 0.3-0.5 mm, exserted ±4-4.5 mm.
Pods mostly solitary or two per capitulum, erect subsessile, in profile broad-linear (25-)30-55 x 4- 8 mm, (4-)6-10-seeded, the shallowly undulate replum 0.3-0.7 mm wide, either unarmed or armed on back and sides with usually few and scattered, erect or gently recurved yellowish aculei, the papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, either densely finely villosulous overall, or minutely pubemlent overall, or glabrous, or charged with erect straight yellowish setae microscopically stellate-branched at tip, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 4-6 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In habit M. campicola is reminiscent of the common M. (ser. Paucifoliatae) diplotricha, but differs in fewer pinnae, fewer larger leaflets, pods bome solitary or paired on each capitulum, and most importantly in trimerous flowers, the character that points to a kinship closer to unijugate ser. Filipedes and especially to M. pabstiana.
The species is known from four discrete parts of Chapada Diamantina and is represented in each by a more or less modified population.
The most distinct of these includes the type-coUection from Sa. do S. Ignacio, in which the stems are minutely incurved-pubemlent as well as aculeate, the petioles are relatively short and not proximally dilated, and the leaflets are relatively broad.
The populations on Sa. do Curral Feio, Sa. do Tombador, and Sa. da Agua da Rega differ coUectively from this in stems pilose with fine horizontal hairs 0.25-1.2 mm long, petiole relatively long and conspicuously dilated toward the base, and relatively narrow leaffets, but they differ among themselves in vesture of the pod.
In the first this is armed on replum with setaculei and hispid on the valves with distally barbellate setae; in the second it is pilosulous overall but unarmed; and in the third it is both thinly pilose and aculeolate on the replum.
The type-collection stands well apart from all subsequently collected specimens, but is connected with them by the population on Sa. do Curral Feio, for the pods of both bear the very unusual setae branched at tip.
These geographic and morphological divergences induce me to recognize two varieties.
Key to varieties of M. campicola I. Stems hirsutulous with fine horizontal hairs to 0.25-2 mm; lf-stks dorsoventrally piano-compressed, 3-costate both dorsaUy and ventraUy and near the pulvinus 0.6-2 mm wide, tapering distally; petiole proper relatively long, 2-6 times as long as first interpinnal segment of If-stk; larger lfts 1.4-2.5 mm wide; centr. and n. Chapada Diamantina (Sa. do Curral Feio s. to Sa. da Agua da Rega) 183a. var. planipes (p. 281).
1.
Stems puberulent with minute, forwardly incurved hairs to 0.15 mm; lf-stks 3-angulate, not compressed, near the pulvinus only 0.4-0.5 mm diam.; petiole proper ±1.5-2 times as long as first interpinnal segment of If-stk; larger lfts 3-4 mm wide; n.-w. spur of Chapada Diamantina (Sa. do S. Ignacio) 183b. var. campicola (p. 282).
183a. Mimosa campicola Harms var. planipes Bameby, Brittonia 37: 148, fig. 9D, E. 1985.- "Brazil.
Bahia: Sa. da Agua da Rega, ±23 km N of Seabra, near 1000 m, 24 Feb 1971 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Harley & G. L. Smith) 30880.''- Holotypus, UB!; isotypi, C! CEPEC! G! K! LE! MBM! MEXU! NY! P! R! S! US! Characters as given in key to varieties; leafstalks 2-5.5 cm, the petiole 1.3-4.3 cm, the 1-3 interpinnal segments (2-)3-9 mm; lfts of distal pinnae (5-)6-9-, 7-11-jug., the longer ones 4-7.5 X (l_)l.4-2.5(-3.5) mm; peduncles 1-3 c m . - Fig.
10 (D, E).
In cerrado and open caatinga thickets near 1000 m, local on the heights of Chapada Diamantina between ± 10°20' and 12°30'S in n.-centr. Bahia, from Sa. do Curral Feio s. through Sa. do Tombador to Sa. da Agua da Rega.-Fl.
I-II(-?).
183b. Mimosa campicola Harms var. campicola.
M. campicola Harms, 1908, I.e., sens, str.—"Bahia: Campo der Serra do Sao Ignacio (ULE n. 7528-Febr. 1907)."-Holotypus, +B = F Neg. 14021; isotypi, F (fragm)! HBG! K! = NY Neg. 1921.
M. campicola var. campicola sensu Lewis, 1987, fig. 9D. Characters as given in key to varieties; leafstalks 1.5-3 cm, the petiole 7-12 mm, the 1-2 interpinnal segments 3-9 mm; pinnae 2-3-jug.; lfts of distal pinnae 4-8-jug., the longer ones 7- 10 X 3-4 mm; peduncles 0.5-1 cm.
In campo, at elevation not recorded, known only from the type, collected on Sa do S. Ignacio, a n.-w. spur of Chapada Diamantina in mun. Gamelleira do A9uma, Bahia.—Fl.
II-III(-?).
183bis.
Mimosa hortensis Bameby, sp. nov., floribus trimeris aliisque multis notulis M. campicolae affinis, sed foliis majoribus, spiculis interpinnalibus nuUis, et praesertim legumine maximo stipitato 55-90 x 9-10 (nec 25-55 x 4-8) mm, articulis monospermis 10-12 (nec 4-6) mm longis crebre setoso-horridis diversa.—Brazil.
Bahia: Joazeiro, "kommt besonders im Nordwest-viertel des Horto Florestal," III. 1912 (fl, fr), Zehntner 38.-Holotypus, R 67735 (one sheet = NY Neg. 12395); isotypi, R 66585 (two sheets).
Of unrecorded stature but probably (in context of kindred) a diffiise subshrub, the distantly foliate flowering and fmiting stems finely pilose with erect hairs of different lengths (the longest ±1.5 mm) and randomly armed on their 4-5 ribs with scattered, gently recurved stramineous aculei 1-2.3 mm, the leaves except for pubemlent and randomly aculeolate axes glabrous concolorous, the subglobose capitula solitary and paired in the axil of coeval or early hysteranthous lvs.
Stipules thinly herbaceous, triangular-lance-acuminate 2-3 X 1-1.3 mm, prominently 1-nerved toward tip, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of major lvs 4.5-7.5 cm, the discolored pulvinus nearly 4 mm, the petiole 2-3 cm, at middle 0.5-0.9 mm diam.. shallowly 2-grooved, the interpinnal segments 1- 2 cm; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae 3-4-jug., Uttle graduated, the rachis including slender discolored pulvinus 10-18 mm, the interfoliolar segments 1.5-2 mm; lfts (5-)6-7-jug., a little decrescent only at very ends of rachis, the first pair 1.5-2 mm distant from subulate-elliptic paraphyllidia 0.3-0.5 mm, the blades narrowly oblong-oblanceolate obtuse from semicordate base, those at mid-rachis ±5.5-8.5 x 1.7-2.8 mm, aU veinless above, beneath weakly 1 (-2)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib only slightly displaced.
Peduncles 13-21 mm, at anthesis filiform, thickened in fmit; capitula without filaments ± 5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse Ifbuds pilosulous with erect hairs; bracts membranous linear 0.5-0.7 mm, eciliolate; flowers 3-merous 6-androus, only some distal ones (in one capitulum examined) bisexual; calyx membranous glabrous, 0.5-0.8 mm, cleft almost to base into narrowly lanceolate lobes; corolla narrowly vase-shaped, basally constricted, 2-2.3 mm, the ovate, finely 1-nerved lobes ±1 x 0.8 mm; filaments pink, free to base, the longer set exserted 4.5 mm; anthers 0.3 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, ascending, stipitate, the stout stipe 2.5-6 mm, the linear, nearly straight body 5.5- 9 X 0.9-1 cm, 6-10-seeded, the shallowly undulately constricted replum 0.5 mm wide, the stiffly papery valves low-convex over each seed, the replum and valves alike hispid overall (more densely so over seeds) with erect tapering tawny setae ±1-3 mm long and minutely retrobarbellate toward apex, the valves when ripe breaking up into free-falling articles 10-12 mm long; seeds disciform 6 x 5 mm, the testa livid-brown.
In unrecorded habitat, known only from the type-collection and -locality at ±9°25'S, 40°30'W on the S. Francisco river in n. Bahia, Brazil.— n .
II-III(-?).
I am uncertain as to the rank properly assignable to this remarkable plant.
Its kinship to M. campicola seems very close, but the differences are weighty: lack of interpinnal spicules; lobulate calyx; and in particular the relatively enormous, stoutly stipitate pod densely hispid overall with erect tawny setae minutely barbed above the middle.
Similar setae, but smaUer and fewer, have been noted in two populations of M. campicola (see discussion above), but these have subsessile pods only 6-7.5 mm wide and proportionately short articles.
184.
Mimosa pabstiana Bameby, sp. nov., caulibus aculeato-armatis flosculisque trimeris ut dicitur albis cum M. ceratonia var. pseudoobovata congrua, sed foliomm formula v-vi/ 12-17 (nec iii-iv/2-5) foliolisque parvulis ± 5- 6.5 (nec 12-26) mm longis primo intuitu diversa, adspectu toto et notis plurimis M. diplotricham et aflines simulans, sed omnibus ab illis flosculis trimeris albis distans.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: estrada BR-4 entre km 810 e 811, 15.1.1965 (fl), G. Pabst 8306 = E. Pereira 9^75.—Holotypus, R 116072; isotypi, BRADE, K, NY, US. M. invisa sensu Glaziou, 1906: 182, ex parte, quoad n. 12641 (A! BR! C! G! K! P, 2 sheets!); non Martius ex Colla.
Prickly shrubs attaining 2 m, armed along the 5 scarcely prominulous ribs of older efoUate stems and homotinous leafy branchlets with scattered decurved broad-based aculei to ± 1.5-2 mm, and along dorsal rib of lf-stks with similar but smaller ones ±0.5 mm, appearing glabrous but the stems, lf-stks and the dorsal face and margin of lfts minutely pubemlent, nowhere glandular, the thintextured plane lfts bicolored when dried, brownolivaceous above, paler beneath, dull on both faces, the globose capitula (1-)2-3 together both in axil of coeval lvs, when early immersed in foliage, and pseudoracemose-paniculate, when exserted up to ±1.5 dm.
Stipules erect setiform 3-6 X 0.3-0.5 mm, prominulously 1-nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks of main cauline lvs 3-8.5 cm, the petiole 8-16 mm, at middle 0.4-0.9 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 5-12 mm, the ventral groove intermpted between pinnapairs by a stiff"acicular spicule 0.6-1.2 mm; pinnae (4-)5-7-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of distal pair 21-33 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments ±1.5-2 mm; lfts of distal pinnae (12-) 13-17-jug., little graduated, the first pair 0.5-1.2 mm distant from stiff"subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.8 mm, the blades oblong or oblong-obovate from obtusangulate base, obtuse but abmptly apiculate, the longer ones 5-6.5 x (1.2-)1.5-2.5 mm, all veinless above, beneath weakly (1-)2-nerved from pulvinule, the scarcely prominulous midrib subcentric, the posterior nerve very short, secondary venulation imperceptible or indistinctly discolored and immersed.
Peduncles ± 1-2 cm; capitula without filaments 5-5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-spatulate 0.4-0.7 x 0.1-0.2 mm, minutely ciliolate; pedicels 0.1-0.2 mm; flowers 3-merous 6-androus glabrous, mostly bisexual or some lower ones staminate; calyx campanulate 0.5-0.7 mm, the rim subtmncate; corolla 2.2- 2.8 mm, narrowly turbinate, the membranous ovate 1-nerved, almost plane lobes 0.9-1.1 x 0.7-0.9 mm; filaments white (or pink t. Glaziou), free or briefly united into a stemonozone below the ovary, exserted 3.5-6 mm; ovary pubemlent after fertilization.
Pods (described from annotinous remains) sessile, in profile narrowly oblong, a little decurved, ±30 x 5 mm and ±8-seeded, the replum to 0.8 mm wide, armed along all 3 keels with stout erect aculei to 1-1.8 mm, the firm venulose brownish-stramineous valves also aculeate, the free-falling articles ±4 mm long. In unreported habitats, to be sought in thickets and along forest-margins or waysides, known only from scattered stations (type-locality; Sta. Barbara) on the e. slope of s. Sa. do Espinha90, between ±19° and 20°S in s.-e. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-R. XII-? The flowers of M. pabstiana were recorded unequivocally by Pabst and Pereira as white.
Glaziou (1906, I.e. sub M. invisa) called them pink, but this may well refer only to the tmly pink flowers of genuine M. invisa, with which he had his nos.
13777 and 12641 confounded.
The supposedly pink flower at first suggested a possible aflinity to M. diplotricha, but M. pabstiana differs decisively from this in relatively short petioles and trimerous flowers.
In habit it is reminiscent of also trimerous ser. Ceratoniae, but it differs gravely from these in leaf-formula and narrow craspedia.
Its tme affinity seems to lie with M. campicola, similar in everything except as specified in the key to ser. Campicolae.
The epithet celebrates and commemorates the late Dr. Guido Pabst, who befriended H. S. Irwin during his years of botanical exploration on the Brazilian Planalto, and to whom the New York Botanical Garden is indebted for invaluable gifts of rare and unusual Leguminosae from southeastern Brazil.
B(xxiii).
Series FILIPEDES Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Filipedes Barneby, ser. nov. e ser. Leptopodis Bentham excerpta et aucta, flosculis trimeris cum ser. Ceratoniis et Campicolis congma, a prima statura modesta et leguminis angusti valvulis in articulos secedentibus, a secunda pinnis conjugatis abstantes, a ser. Paucifoliatis vix nisi flosculis trimeris diversae.—Sp. typica: M. filipes Martius.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Leptopodae Bentham, 1875: 432, minoreexparte(spp. 230, 231), 1876: 370 (spp. 154, 155).
Subshrubs weakly woody at base or often functionally herbaceous, seldom over 1 m tall, sometimes appearing monocarpic when flowering the first season, either unarmed or armed on internodes and some lf-stks with scattered recurved aculei.
Indumentum of plain hairs and reddish granules, sometimes almost 0, never setose, eglandular (rarely a minute gland on calyx-teeth).
Stipules mostly setiform or subulateto Unearattenuate less than 1 mm wide, ovate only when very short.
Lf-formula i/3-16; interpinnal spicules present.
Capitula globose, without filaments 3-6.5 mm diam.; flowers sessile 3-merous 6-androus; calyx 0.2-0.6 mm, tmncate or minutely 3-denticulate; bisexual corolla (1.5-) 1.7-3.2 mm; filaments monadelphous through 0.3-0.7 mm, or sometimes free to base or almost so.
Pods either stipitate or subsessile, the linear body 3.5- 8 mm wide, the replum 0.3-0.7 mm diam., either aculeate or not, the valves disarticulating.
Spp. 5, primarily of cerrado and campo habitats in upland tropical e. BrazU n.-ward from centr. Minas Gerais, one extending disjunctly to Venezuela.
The small series Filipedes has the trimerous flower and nearly the geographic dispersal of ser. Cordistipulae, but differs in the syndrome of eglandular indumentum, spiculate leaf-stalks, and paraphyllidia at base of each pinna-rachis.
In everything but the trimerous flower and the leaves simplified down to one pair of pinnae it agrees with ser. Paucifoliatae, the geographic center of which lies further west on the central Brazilian planalto and the campos of Paraguay.
Equally close or even closer kindred are trimerous ser. Campicolae approximately sympatric and different only in two or more pairs of pinnae per leaf Such members of these series as were known to Bentham were all referred in his monograph (1875) to a comprehensive ser. Leptopodae, but even though relationship between them is not disputed, it seems better expressed by segregation and more exact definition of four, apparently independent lines of evolutionary specialization.
Mimosa 185. palmetorum Bamehy 186. piscatorum Bamehy Conspectus of ser. Filipedes 187. subenervis Bentham 188. polydidyma Bamehy 189. filipes Martius 1.
Key to species of ser. Filipedes Stems aculeate pilosulous.
2.
Stipules 2-7 mm; lfts 3^-jug., glabrous, the longer ones 7.5-12 x 4-6 mm; peduncles 18-37 mm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam.; corolla glabrous; filaments exserted 3.5-4 mm; centr. Bahia 185.
Af. palmetorum (p. 284).
2.
Stipules 1-3 mm; lfts (4-)5-9(-l l)-jug., either pilosulous on both faces or sometimes glabrous, the longer ones 3.5-7.5(-8) x 1-2 mm; peduncles 4-15 mm; capitula without filaments 3.5-4 mm diam.; coroUa pubemlent; filaments exserted 1-2 mm; Pemambuco and e. Bahia, Brazil; n. Venezuela. .. 186.
M. piscatorum (p. 286).
Stems either unarmed or glabrous, often both.
3.
Lfts 9-16-jug., the larger ones 3.5-6 mm wide 187.
M. subenervis (p. 288).
3.
Lfts (3-)4-7-jug., the larger ones 0.7-3 mm wide.
4.
Lvs crowded along stems, forwardly overlapping, their petiole dorsiventrally compressed 3-costate; stipules 3-9 mm; capitula without filaments 4-6.5 mm diam.; local in s.-centr. Bahia 188.
M. polydidyma (p. 288).
4.
Lvs scattered and remote, their petiole filiform subterete; stipules 1-1.5 mm; capitula without filaments 3-4 mm diam.; Maranhao to w. Pemambuco, s. to centr. Minas Gerais 189.
M. filipes (p. 290).
185.
Mimosa palmetorum Bameby, Brittonia 37: 149, fig. 11.
1985.-"Brazil Bahia: Sa. dos Len^ois, slopes of Pai Inacio 800-1100 m, ± 15 km NW of Len96is in mun. Palmeiras, 24 May 1980 (fl), R. M. Harley 22^97."-Holotypus, CEPEC 31667\; isotypi, K! NY! Fig.
14.
2mm.
FIG 14.
Mimosa palmetorum Bameby.
A. Flowering stem.
B. Apex of leaf-stalk, showing appendage, pulvinules, and paraphyllidia.
C. Part of stem + stipules.
D. Bract + flower. (A-C from Harley 22420, D from Harley 22491.) Slender diffiise or ascending, functionally herbaceous subshrubs attaining ± 1 m, the simple or remotely few-branched, sparsely leafy stem less than 2 mm diam., prominently obtusely ribbed and armed with recurved stramineous browntipped aculei to 0.6-2 mm, also thinly to quite densely pilosulous with fine white erect hairs to ±0.5-0.7 mm, the firm plane concolorously olivaceous but often red-margined lfts glabrous, minutely pallid-dotted, the small globose capitula all or mostly axillary on peduncle shorter than or scarcely equaling the associated If Stipules spreading-incurved or erect, linear-lance-attenuate (2.5-)3-7 X 0.45-1 mm, coarsely 1-nerved dorsally, remotely ciliolate below middle, tardily deciduous.
Leafstalks filiform subterete (2-)2.5- 4 cm, at middle 0.2-0.35 mm diam., bearing at apex the recurved terminal seta, a single pair of pinnae, and between these an ascending spicule 1.5-2 mm, either smooth throughout or charged on back with 1-2 small aculeoli; rachis of pinnae 8-12 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 3-5 mm; lfts 3-4-jug., accrescent distally, the first pair 1.5-2 mm distant from unequal lance-subulate paraphyllidia 0.7-1.3 mm, all obliquely obovate or broadly oblong-eUiptic obtuse from semicordate base, the distal pair 7.5-12 x 4-6 mm, 1.7-2.2 times as long as wide, the moderately displaced midrib and 1 posterior primary nerve weakly prominulous beneath only, the latter incurved ascending and expiring beyond midblade.
Peduncles fasciculate by 2-4 or some early ones solitary, all filiform 18-37 mm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the plumply obovoid fl-buds glabrous but lustrously papillate above middle; bracts submembranous, narrowly oblance-obovate 0.3-0.8 mm, 1-denticulate on each side, glabrous; y/ow^r5 3-merous 6-androus, glabrous, the lower ones mostly staminate; calyx membranous 0.3-0.4 mm, the minute teeth sometimes glandtipped; corolla turbinate 2.3-2.7 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave 1-nerved lobes 1.2-1.4 x 0.75- 0.9 mm, at apex purplish and a little thickened; filaments bright pink, monadelphous through 0.2 mm or less below the glabrous ovary, exserted 3.5-4 mm; pod unknown.
On open grassy slopes near sandstone outcrops, 700-1100 m, apparently local, known only from Sa. dos Len96is in municipio of Palmeiras, on headwaters of rio Paraguagu near 12°30'S in upland centr. Bahia, Brazil.-H. V-VI(-?).
Mimosa palmetorum has much in common with M. filipes, but is clearly distinguished by setiform stipules and by stems at once prickly and pilosulous.
From prickly M. piscatorum it differs in longer stipules, fewer and larger leaflets, peduncles twice as long, and substantially larger capitula with glabrous flowers and further exserted filaments (for measurements see key to species of ser. Filipedes).
186.
Mimosa piscatorum Bameby, sp. nov., caulibus retro-aculeatis, pinnis 1-jugis, necnon flosculis 3-meris diplostemoneis M. palmetorum proxima, sed ab ea stipulis brevioribus 1- 3 (nec 3-7) mm longis, folioUs (4-)5-9(-ll) (nec 3-4)-jugis, pedunculis abbreviatis 4-15 (nec 18-37) mm longis, capituUs absque filamentis 3 .
5 ^ (nec 5-6) mm diametro, flosculisque pubemlis (nec glabris) diversa.—Brazil.
Pemambuco: in a field at Pesqueira, 5.
IX. 1934 (fl 4- fr), D. Bento Pickel 3683. -Holotypus, F = NY Neg. 11895.
Slender, diffiise or scrambling subshrubs 4-8 dm, randomly armed on ribs of stem and on some lf-stks with recurved aculei 0.5-1.3 mm sometimes mixed with straight spreading or incurved pallid hairs to ±0.3-0.5 mm, remotely reddish-granular but nowhere glandular, the foliage rich green or olivaceous subconcolorous, the thin-textured lfts either minutely pubemlent on both faces, or glabrescent above, or glabrous on both faces, the small globose capitula solitary in If-axils on a peduncle as long as or commonly shorter than the associated If-stk. Stipules erect setiform ±1-3 x 0.2 mm, persistent or tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 11—40 mm, at middle 0.2- 0.3 mm diam., obscurely sulcate ventrally, usually but not quite always spiculate at apex; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 5-16(-23) mm, the interfoliolar segments 1.3-2 mm; lfts (4-)5-9(-l l)-jug., proximally decrescent, the first pair 1-1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.7 mm, the blades Unear-oblong or oblong-oblanceolate obtuse or bluntly mucronulate, shallowly semicordate at base, those near and above mid-rachis 3.5-7.5(-8) X 1.4-2 mm, 2.2-4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath finely 2(-3)- nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric beyond mid-blade, faintly 2-3-branched distally, the inner (or only) posterior nerve expiring near or short of mid-blade, the venation discolored but not prominulous.
Peduncles 4-15 mm; capitula without filaments 3.5-4 mm diam., the receptacle 1 mm diam., the fl-buds obtuse, thinly pubemlent; bracts membranous oblanceolate, less than 1 mm, deciduous; flowers 3-merous 6-androus; calyx membranous turbinate-campanulate 0.25-0.6 mm, the triangular teeth unequal, to 0.1-0.25 mm, the orifice either glabrous or ciliolate and with a few livid glandular trichomes; corolla turbinate 1.7-2.1 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave 1-nerved lobes 0.9-1.2 x 0.6- 0.8 mm, thinly pUosulous dorsally; filaments essentially free, exserted 1-2 mm; ovary granularpubemlent or glabrous.
Pods 2-8 per capitulum.
MAP 25.
Parts of n. and e. South America.
Ranges of M.filipesMartius and M. piscatorum Bameby. subsessile or contracted at base into a stipe 1-2 mm, the body in profile Unear-oblong or linear, straight or almost so, cuspidate at apex, overall ±25-42 X 3.5^.5mm,(5-)6-14-seeded, the almost straight replum 0.35-0.6 mm wide, randomly armed on back and sides with nearly erect stramineous aculei 0.5-2.5 mm, the replum and valves alike pilosulous overall with erect-ascending whitish hairs 0.2-0.5 mm and randomly granular, or simply granular, the papery stramineous unarmed valves low-colliculate over each seed, breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 3-4 mm long; seeds trapezoid compressed ± 3 x 2 mm, the testa dull tan-brown, fuscous at the hilum.
In savanna, fields, and disturbed semideciduous woodland, apparently rare (but perhaps overlooked), known only from these disjunct localities in tropical S. America: at 1300 m on Loma de Le6n in Lara, n.-w. Venezuela (Cardenas de Guevara 2553, NY); at 10-300 m on Islas Caracas del Oeste and Margarita in Sucre and Nueva Esparta, n.-e. Venezuela (Steyermark 108101, 130999, NY, VEN); at 300 m in n. Bolivar, Venezuela (La Encmcijada, C. D. Johnson 3016, NY); near 650 m in interior e. Pemambuco, Brazil (near 36°40'W, 8°20'S, the type-locality; Gravata); and in lowland e.-centr. Bahia (G. Pinto 946, NY).-F1. in Venezuela IX-II, in BrazU V-IX. Map 25.
This is a weak, weedy, inconspicuous mimosa superficially resembling forms of M. pudica with conjugate-pinnate, very sensitive leaves, but its trimerous diplostemonous flowers indicate a tme aflinity with M. palmetorum and its relatives in ser. Filipedes.
From M. palmetorum, with which it agrees in delicately aculeolate stems and single pair of pinnae, it differs in shorter stipules, in smaller, more numerous leaflets, in shorter peduncles, and in smaller capitula of pubemlent flowers.
In general demeanor M. piscatorum bears considerable resemblance to M. pinetorum Standi, of Belize, but this has tumed out to be a haplostemonous Eu-Mimosa.
Despite an essential similarity, the material of M. piscatorum shows some variation in detail.
The leaflets of the type are pubescent on both faces, but those of Venezuelan plants vary from pubescent to glabrous.
I found no interpinnal spicule in most leaves of Steyermark 108101, but they appear in all other collections.
Mimosa piscatorum is currently better known from Venezuela (5 collections) than from Brazil (3 collections), but as all its close kindred are concentrated in a relatively compact area of eastem Brazil it seems likely that its Venezuelan distribution is derived.
In Lara it was discovered on an experimental goat farm, but we know nothing of the microhabitat elsewhere, except that all known localities are situated in seasonally dry climates similar to that prevailing in Pemambuco.
187.
Mimosa subenervis Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 432.
1875 & in Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 370 [^^subenervia],''^ descr. ampliat.
1876.—"Habitat ad Moritiba in Serra da Jacobina provinciae Bahiensis: Blanchet n. 3687."-Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 11639; isotypi, BM! C! F! = F Negs.
54868, 54869, 55016, G! = F Neg. 28233, M! MO! P!W! M. subenervis sensu Lewis, 1987: 142.
Probably suffruticose, at least 4-5 dm tall but of unknown potential stature, glabrous throughout, unarmed, the simple or distally branched stems subterete castaneous, the foliage when dry livid-nigrescent, the plane thick-textured lfts slightly paler above, the small globose capitula fasciculate by 2-6 in the axil of mostly coetaneous lvs, when young forming a short, scarcely exserted pseudoraceme.
Stipules firm, narrowly ovate or triangular-acuminate 1-1.5 x 0.4-0.7 mm, weakly 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including wrinkled pulvinus 12-30 mm, at middle 0.5-0.8 mm diam., obcompressed, openly sulcate ventrally, rounded dorsally, the ventral sulcus bridged at apex and charged with a small slender, sometimes deciduous spicule; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 17-75 mm, the interfoliolar segments 1.5-4.5 mm; lfts 9-16-jug., proximally decrescent, upward subequilong, the small first pair 1.5-2.3 mm distant from ovate-subulate paraphyllidia 0.25-0.4 mm, the blades obliquely oblong-elUptic, very obtuse, the larger ones 5.5- 13 X 3.5-6 mm, all smooth dull on both faces, the venation fully immersed.
Peduncles ± I cm; capitula without filaments 4-4.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts minute; flowers 3-merous 6-androus; calyx scarcely 2 mm, irregularly 3-lobulate, glabrous; corolla turbinate 1.6- 2 mm, the ovate, faintly 1-nerved lobes ±0.9 x 0.7 mm, scarcely thickened at apex; androecium not seen fully expanded, the filaments apparently exserted little over 2 mm; pod not seen.
In cerrado or campo mpestre near 1000 m, known only from Sa. da Jacobina and vicinity, near 11°S, 40°30'W in n.-centr. Bahia, BrazU.- n. ? The foregoing description is derived from the widely distributed type-set, mostly in young flower.
A fmiting specimen (Da Fonseca 298) was cited by Lewis (1987, I.e.) but was not found at K in 1987.
Among unarmed Filipedes the species seems well characterized by number and relative amplitude of the leaflets.
188.
Mimosa polydidyma Bameby, Brittonia 37: 150, fig. 12.
1985.-"BraziL Bahia: Sa. da Larguinha ±2 km NE of Caete-Agu (Capao Grande), 1000-1400 m, 41°29'W, 12°36'S, 25 May 1980 (fl, fr jun), R. M. Harley 22645 [sphalm. pro 75677]."-Holotypus, CEPEC 104031; isotypi, K! NY! US! Fig.
15.
Unarmed perennial herbs from weakly suflrutescent base, the stiff slender, erect or decumbent stems (2-)3-10 dm, densely clad in strictly ascending paucifoliolate lvs, glabrous except for few fine cUia near base of stipules and on paraphyllidia, the firm green or subglaucescent lfts essentially veinless extemally, the small globose capitula elevated above subtending If on relapoluduLu.
FIG. 15.
Mimosa polydidyma Bameby.
A. Flowering stem.
B. Portion of stem + stipules.
C. Leaflet, dorsal view.
D. Bract + calyx + flower. (A from Harley 15677, the rest from Harley 22645.) tively long slender, widely divaricate peduncle from axils of distal lvs.
Stipules stiffly erect, narrowly Unear-attenuate or subsetiform 3-8(-9) x 0.3-0.6 mm, 1-nerved below middle, persistent.
Leafstalks at and beyond mid-stem (5-)6-40 (a few lower ones to 40-70, no further described), mm, dorsiventrally compressed 3-ribbed, at middle 0.3-0.6 mm wide, at apex charged with a short seta and a spicule between the one pair of pinnae; rachis of pinnae 4-9 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-2 mm; lfts 4-7-jug., the first pair 0.7-2 mm distant from subulate reddish paraphyllidia ±0.5 mm, in outline oblong-elliptic-oblanceolate obtuse, distally accrescent, all at base rounded proximally, the distal pair 3-5.5 X 1.5-2 mm, ±2-3 times as long as wide, the immersed, scarcely perceptible midrib centric or a little forwardly displaced, the blade otherwise veinless.
Peduncles(I2i-)l5-3^5 mm, compressed like lf-stks, capitula without filaments 4-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the subglobose reddish-purple fl-buds glabrous but resinously papillate; bracts oblanceolate less than 1 mm, persistent; flowers 3-merous 6-androus, glabrous throughout, some lower ones staminate; calyx membranous campanulate 0.4-0.5 mm, the three low-deltate lobes sometimes gland-tipped; corolla turbinate 2-2.2 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave 1-nerved lobes 1.1-1.2 x 0.8-0.9 mm, a little thickened at reddish tip; filaments pink, free to base or almost so, exserted to 2.3-3 mm; ovary glabrous.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 9F) solitary or geminate, in profile linear ±25-35 x 5 mm, abmptly contracted at base into a stipe 1- 2 mm and at apex into an erect cusp 1-2.5 mm, 6-8-seeded, the smooth glabrous, shallowly undulate replum 0.3-0.5 mm wide, the piano-compressed, glabrous or microscopically pubemlent valves low-colliculate over each seed, the freefalling articles ±2.5-3 mm long; ripe seeds unknown.
In rocky savanna on sandstone, 1000-1400 m, known only from Chapada Diamantina on headwaters of rios Paragua9u and Contas in lat. 12°30'- 13°40'S in s.-centr. Bahia.-H. XI-II, V-VI(-?), perhaps at intervals through the year.
Since it was described in 1985 M. polydidyma has been collected once again near Caete-A9ti, this time bearing pods as well as flowers.
The fruit is that to be expected in a close relative of M. palmetorum and M. filipes, species of the same region characterized by conjugate pinnae, relatively few leaflets, and spiculate leaf-stalks.
It differs from these in densely foliate stems and in dorsiventrally compressed, three-ribbed petioles, from M. palmetorum further in stiff' unarmed stems, and from M. filipes further in setiform stipules.
In the protologue Dr. Harley's collection numbers 15677 and 22645 were carelessly reversed; the former, which = CEPEC 10403, is the typeset, the latter paratypic.
189.
Mimosa filipes Martius, Flora 21(2, Beibl.
4-5): 52 [=Herb. fl. bras. 132].
1838.-".
.
. in campis 'mimoso' dictis ad Serra Branca in Prov. Piauhiensi superiore, Majo [1819] florens."
—Holotypus, M (2 sheets)! = FNeg.
6180 = IPA Neg. 1345.
M7z///7^5 sensu Bentham, 1841: 373, 1875: 432, 1876: 370; Lewis, 1987, fig. 9E. Slender, either erect few-branched or finally diffiisely many-branched, remotely foliate herbs 3-10 dm, flowering the first season when appearing monocarpic but potentially suffruticulose, glabrous below the ovary and eglandular, the smooth ribbed stems either green or purplish, the olivaceous lfts thin-textured, the small globose capitula mostly scattered in axils of middle and upper lvs and surpassed by them, but some pseudoracemose and exserted.
Stipules submembranous, narrowly ovateor lance-aristate 1-1.5 mm, persistent.
Leafstalks filiform, widely ascending (1.3-)2-4.5 cm, charged at apex with an acicular interpinnal spicule; pinnae 1-jug., their rachis 5-13 mm, the interfoliolar segments 1- 2.5 mm; lfts (3-)4-7-jug., little graduated, in sleep subvertically imbricate, the first pair (1-) 1.5-3 mm from pinna-pulvinus, all oblong-elUptic or narrowly obovate obtuse 2-9 x 0.7-3 mm, the margin plane, the blade faintly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the costa subcentric.
Peduncles solitary or geminate, filiform 9-40 mm; capitula without filaments 3-4 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the bracts vestigial, less than 0.5 mm; flowers 3-merous 6-androus glabrous, some proximal ones staminate, the rest bisexual; calyx membranous ±2 mm; corolla turbinatecampanulate 1.5-1.8 mm, the obovate obtuse, shallowly concave, faintly 1 -nerved, greenish or purplish lobes ± 1 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through ±0.2-0.3 mm, exserted 3 .
5 ^ mm.
Pods solitary or geminate, randomly spreadingascending, the broad-linear, nearly straight planocompressed body 25-38 x 3.5-5 mm, contracted at base into a stipe 2-4.5 mm, the shallowly undulate replum 0.25-0.3 mm diam., either smooth or armed with divaricate tapering setaculei to 0.5-2 mm, the thin, green or purplish, densely minutely villosulous or glabrous atomiferous valves becoming brownish papery, breaking when ripe into (5-)6-9 almost square, individually indehiscent, free-falling articles; seeds compressed-rhomboid ±3-4 x 3 x 0.6 mm, the testa pale fawn or light brown, minutely granular, the areole ±1.5 x 1 mm.
In open sandy or stony places in campo mpestre, campo sujo, cerrado and caatinga, 300- 1000 m, apparently not common but inconspicuous and easily overlooked, scattered over eastem Brazil from s. Maranhao to far w. Pemambuco, s. through lower S. Francisco valley and Chapada Diamantina in Bahia to Sa. do Espinha- 90 in centr. Minas Gerais.—R. I-IV. Map 25.
Glabrous unarmed, remotely leafy stems, tiny stipules, a single pair of pinnae with a spicule between them, 3-7 pairs of glabrous leaflets and tiny capitula contribute to the unique facies of M. filifolia.
Young plants, like those collected by Martius, appear monocarpic, but older ones develop a distinctly suffruticose base; probably none are obligately annual.
So far as present evidence goes, the pod in populations of M. filipes from Bahia northward has a perfectly smooth replum but the valves may be either simply pubemlent, both pubemlent and granular, or simply granular.
In Minas Gerais, from Grao Mogol south to Diamantina, the replum is consistently fimbriate along its dorsal and lateral ribs with weak setiform aculei, and the valves are consistently pubemlent.
Perhaps two weakly differentiated varieties may eventually be recognized.
B(xxiv).
Series QUADRIVALVES Bameby Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Quadrivalves Barneby, nom. & stat nov. Schrankia WiUdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 888, 1041.
1806, nom. generic, conserv. contra Schrankiam Medicus (1792).—Sp. typica: Schrankia aculeata Willdenow = Mimosa quadrivalvis lAnnaeus—Morongia Britton, Mem. Torrey Bot. Club 5: 191.
1894, nom. generic, rejic.
Leptoglottis DeCandolle, Mem. Legum. 451.
1826, nom. provis.,
validated by Standley, J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 15: 458.
1925.-Sp. typica (CandoUeana): L. nuttallii DeCandolle ex Standley = Mimosa quadrivalvis var. nuttallii (DC. ex Standi.) Beard ex Barneby.
Diffuse or humifuse herbs from woody root or caudex, in tropical lowlands sometimes weakly fmtescent and sarmentose, armed on ribs of stem, If-axes, and often of peduncles with serial cat'sclaw aculei, either glabrous or nearly so throughout or thinly pubemlous and livid-granular, esetose and eglandular.
Stipules linear or setiform, 1-nerved.
Leaf-formula i-ix/5-24; interpinnal spicules present.
Capitula axillary or early becoming so, globose, without filaments 4-11 mm diam.;flowers sessile or short-pedicellate, (4-)5- 6-merous, all diplostemonous, usually many lower ones staminate; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate 0.3-0.6 mm, short-toothed or subtmncate; corolla (1.8-)2-4.3 mm, the lobes 1-nerved; filaments vivid or pale pink, rarely white, united below the ovary into a short stemonozone.
Pods sessile, in profile either linear or narrowly oblong, either apiculate or apically attenuate into a sterile beak, either obtusely tetragonal or laterally compressed, the low-convex replum 1-6 mm wide, either broader or narrower than the also convex or sometimes almost (when broad) flat valves, the whole varying from densely hispid-setaculeate along all ribs of replum and along middle of valves to distantly aculeolate or rarely quite smooth, in addition either glabrous or densely pubemlent, the ripe valves separating inertly from replum in one piece but not shed, sometimes incompletely fractured between seeds; ovules 8-30; seeds commonly basipetal in one row, either contiguous or shortly imbricated, then compressed at each end by mutual pressure, exceptionally, in short pluriovulate pods, dmmshaped and closely contiguous.
Sp.
1, widely dispersed in the tropical and warm temperate zones of North and South America and in two forms extending n. into the plains of South Dakota and the piedmont of Virginia, most diverse in s.-w. United States and Mexico, less so in South America, in West Indies narrowly localized on Puerto Rico and the Lesser Antilles, the whole consisting of 16, either vicariant and intergrading or some sympatric and better differentiated varieties; in North America only on the Atlantic slope, in Mexico both on the GulfCaribbean and the Pacific slopes, in S. America only e. of the Andes (in Colombia e. of the westem Cordillera), extending s. to n.-e. Argentina and extratropical Brazil.
The series Quadrivalves is coextensive with the genus Schrankia, a group of Mimoseae that since Bentham's monograph (1875) has almost universally (but often apologetically) been maintained, under one name or another, as generically distinct from Mimosa.
Its claim to generic status, laid down when only a fraction ofpresently known tme mimosas had been discovered, is based on a narrow, obtusely tetragonal, valvately dehiscent pod with replum as wide as or wider than the valves that characterized the generitype, M. quadrivalvis.
This carpological syndrome has since become well known in Mimosa itself, where it must have arisen independently in different lines of inheritance: the ser. Pachycarpae in sect. Habbasia, the ser. Leiocarpae in sect. Batocaulon, and ser. Stipellares in sect. Mimosa all offer examples of it.
Moreover in several varieties of M. quadrivalvis, notably in var. platycarpa (Schrankia roemeriana auct.), the pod is in reality laterally compressed, with valves broader than the replum.
In habit, in pithy stems, and in armament of cat's-claw aculei, the Quadrivalves closely imitate Mimosa diplotricha, differing from that species, before its readily articulate craspedium takes recognizable form, by prevailingly 5- or 5-6-merous flowers.
Many Quadrivalves, but not all, have higher numbers of ovules and seeds than habitally similar Mimosae; but the ovules may be as few as 8-10 in M. quadrivalvis var. latidens and as many as 12-16 in M. diplotricha var. odibilis.
An indication of overall similarity between Schrankia and Mimosa ser. Paucifoliatae and Plurijugae is the fact that members of the two latter groups have been redescribed, from flowering material, as Schrankiae.
Schrankia is most abundant and diversified in southeastem United States, Texas, and Mexico, where it is sympatric with traditionally "typical" Mimosae of diverse types, and in this geographic context, where it has been most closely studied, it stands out as sharply delimited.
It is otherwise in South America, where it is more readily perceived as one of several carpologically modified types of tme Mimosa.
The inclusion of Schrankia in Mimosa requires no modification whatever in the classical definition of the latter genus and is long overdue.
Evenhanded application to Mimosa of the criteria used to maintain Schrankia as a distinct generic group would entail an unacceptable fragmentation of Mimosa into a horde of inexactly definable microgenera.
Six species of Schrankia were known to Bentham in 1876 (p. 441), most of them from only one or few specimens.
In 1928 Britton & Rose described for North America no less than twentytwo species, under the generic title of Leptoglottis.
The schrankias were studied in detail prior to 1946 at University of North Carolina by J. S. Beard (1963), who concluded, in an unpublished doctoral dissertation, that the genus consisted of one pluriracial species properly known as Mimosa quadrivalvis.
This view was vigorously disputed by Isely (1971 a), who evaluated Schrankia as "a coherent group of undoubted evolutionary unity," and estimated the genus to contain "possibly fifteen" members, of which seven occurred in the United States.
In defense of the generic status of Schrankia Isely warned that if generic standards in Mimosoideae became so relaxed as to admit Schrankia into Mimosa, the whole subfamily "would probably have to be reduced to 1 or 2 genera."
The claim that discontinuities between Parkia, Acacia, Prosopis, Adenanthera, Piptadenia, Inga and Calliandra, for example, are of the same order as that between Schrankia and Mimosa is so plainly exaggerated as to weaken the proposition it advocates.
Nor does Isely's key to the seven species in the United States flora (subsequently reduced to six) dispel the suspicion, easily confirmed by study of specimens and by long-standing confusion as to their characters and nomenclature, that these are very weakly and often indecisively characterized, as much by geographical dispersal as by stable morphological differences.
To one aware of the full range of variation in the Mimosa pod, especially among Brazilian species, the logic of Beard's evaluation of Schrankia as a single pluriracial species of Mimosa is convincing.
His reduction of Schrankia is here accepted without qualification, and I am sympathetic to his comprehensive definition of M. quadrivalvis because I have encountered a parallel case of complex racial divergence in the related South American M. gracilis sens. lat. The internal taxonomy of M. quadrivalvis is in need of biosystematic study and my attempts to interpret it are merely provisional.
Bentham divided his five schrankias into two groups, one of tropical South America with relatively short peduncles, the other of extratropical continental North America with relatively long ones.
Members of these two groups differ overall in ovulenumber, generally 20-30 in the first and generally less than 20, but to 24 in the second.
It appears to me likely, in the context of Mimosa, where 4-10 is the common range of ovule-number in the majority of subgeneric groups, that redupUcation of ovules is a derived character, and this suggests that the South American forms of M. quadrivalvis are more advanced.
The North American and South American races display parallel variation in leaf-formula, but the North American ones are more polymorphic in pubescence, in leaflet-venulation, and in length of pod, all described in detail by Isely (1971a).
At an early stage of my study I contemplated a compromise between the taxonomies proposed by Beard and Isely, where the short-pedunculate multiovulate and the long-pedunculate pauciovulate assemblages might be maintained at specific rank, the former consisting of two and the latter of at least ten subsidiary units.
But random short-pedunculate forms in western Mexico and the ambivalent Schrankia portoricensis, which combines many ovules with relatively long peduncles, are insuperable obstacles to this scheme.
Consequently, I here follow Beard in his definition of the one species M. quadrivalvis and am validating in the following pages some unpublished trinomials that he proposed in annotation of specimens.
While differing fundamentally from Isely on the generic segregation of Schrankia and the hierarchical level of its component taxa, I follow his revision (1971a, slightly modified in 1973 and later) with only slight difference of opinion on the circumscription of S. latidens.
For the western Mexican taxa I follow, with minor expressions of doubt or dissent, the treatment of McVaugh in Flora Novo-Galiciana (1987).
Fieldwork on the Pacific slope and in the Balsas Basin should be undertaken to find more exact correlation between ffowers and fmits of the schrankias in this region.
I have listed in the Exsiccatae specimens only from South America and the West Indies.
Conspectus of ser. Quadrivalves Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus 190a. var. quadrivalvis 190b. var. distachya (DeCandolle) Bameby 190c. yar. jaliscensis (Macbride) Beard ex Bameby 190d. var. diffusa (Rose) Beard ex Bameby 190e. var. urbaniana Bameby 190f var. tetragona (Poiret) Bameby 190g. var. leptocarpa (DeCandolle) Bameby 190.
Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus, Sp. pi. 522.
1753.—Typus infra sub var. quadrivalvi indicatur.
Humifuse or weakly assurgent and herbaceous or, in tropical lowlands, sometimes softly frutescent and sarmentose, the subterete or prominently ribbed or sharply 4-5-angulate, internally pithy stems at anthesis 4-20(-30) dm, either simple or randomly branched, the plant either fully glabrous, or glabrous except for weakly ciliolate stipules and lfts, or finely densely pubemlent and minutely reddish-granular, the stems, most Ifaxes and some peduncles serially armed with widely recurved or declined stramineous aculei to 0.7-2.2(-2.5) mm, the subconcolorous or distinctly discolorous lfts most often glabrous facially but some near base of pinna-rachis often thinly pubemlent, or all dorsally strigulose-pilosulous, the globose capitula single and geminate in a long series of If-axils, each on a peduncle shorter than the subtending If, sometimes pseudoracemose in young bud but early immersed in foliage.
Stipules erect, narrowly lanceolate, Unear-attenuate or setiform (1-) 1.5-9 x 0.2-0.7 mm, dorsally 1-nerved, persistent or becoming dry and fragile.
Leaf-stalks of longer lvs 2-17 cm, the petiole 1.5-11 cm, either shorter or longer than rachis, the longer interpinnal segments 6-28(-35) mm, the ventral sulcus bridged between pinna-pairs and there charged with an ascending spicule 0.5-2.5 mm; pinnae of larger lvs 1-9-jug., not or little graduated, the rachis of longer ones 1-6 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.8-2.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 5-22(- 24)-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the first pair 0.4-2 mm distant from ascending subulate paraphyllidia 0.1-0.6(-l) mm, the blades linear, Unear-oblong, -oblanceolate, or oblong-elUptic from obtusangulate base, at apex acute, obtuse mucronulate or sharply apiculate, those near midrachis 2.5-11(-13) X 0.6-2.8 mm, 2.8-6 times 190h. var. angustata (Torrey & Gray) Bameby 190i. var. floridana (Chapman) Bameby 190j. var. nuttallii (DeCandofle) Beard ex Bameby 190k. var. hystricina (Small) Bameby 1901. var. occidentalis (Wooton & Standley) Bameby 190m. var. platycarpa (A. Gray) Bameby 190n. var. nelsonii (Britton & Rose) Bameby 190o. var. latidens (Small) Bameby 190p. var. paucijuga (Britton & Rose) Beard ex Bameby as long as wide, all veinless or nearly so above, beneath l-4(-5)-nerved from pulvinule, the scarcely displaced midrib either simple or l-4(- 5)-branched near or above middle, the branches either simple or forked within the margin, the inner posterior (rarely also one weak anterior) primary nerve produced to or beyond mid-blade and anastomosing with a secondary nervule from midrib, the outer posterior nerve(s) short and simple, the venation imperceptible or almost so on upper face of blade, on lower face from pallid and sharply raised to discolored and immersed, sometimes almost imperceptible on both faces.
Peduncles at anthesis 0.4-13(-20) cm, either prickly or not; capitula without filaments 4-11 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform (the bracts exceptionally shortly emergent), the obtuse, greenish or purple-tinged fl-buds glabrous; bracts submembranous, usually less than 1 mm; pedicels either obsolete or to 1 mm; flowers (4-)5-6- merous, diplostemonous, most lower ones functionally staminate; calyx membranous, shortly campanulate 0.3-0.6 mm, the rim either undulate or minutely toothed, the teeth sometimes clavately dilated at tip; corolla turbinate to narrowly or subcampanulately vase-shaped (1.8-)2- 4.3 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.6-1.7 x 0.6- 0.85 mm; filaments pink or purplish-pink, sometimes fading whitish, united with corolla into a stemonozone 0.25-0.5 mm, exserted 2.5-9(-10) mm.
Pods 1-7(-10) per capitulum, erect or stiffly ascending, sessile or contracted at base into a stout neck, in profile linear or, when relatively short, narrowly oblong in profile, either straight or gently curved, disregarding armament of aculei (1.7-)2-14(-15) cm x 2.5-6.5 mm, at apex either shortly apiculate or tapering into a sterile beak to 2(-2.4) cm, the body either bluntly quadrangular or compressed-quadrangular in section, the convex 4-5-ribbed replum l^(-5.5) mm wide, the valves commonly narrower or as wide but in some vars. broader, when narrower strongly convex and when broader less so, (1-) 1.2-6 m m wide, the replum commonly armed on all ribs with either discrete or crowded and basally confluent, laterally compressed stramineous, straight or gently recurved aculei to 1.5-3(-4) mm, the valves often similarly aculeate in a line down middle or not rarely overall, the whole glabrous or densely pubemlent between (exceptionally also on) aculei, the ripe valves separating tardily in one piece from replum but sometimes erratically mptured between seeds; seeds 8-30, basipetal, uniseriate and contiguous or shortly imbricate (then mutually flattened at overlapping ends), in shorter pods no longer than wide but in longer pods oblong-eUiptic, the largest (3_)3.3_6(_9) X 2-3(-3.5) mm, the testa brown, livid-brown or black, lustrous.
Key to varieties of M. quadrivalvis Lfts of longer pinnae (9-)10-25(-30)-jug.; if longest pinna-rachises less than 15 mm then the pinnae of larger lvs 4-9-jug. 2.
Longer peduncles almost always over 15 mm, randomly shorter only in Puerto Rico and s.-w. Mexico, and there combined with capitula more than 5 mm diam. without filaments; if capitula only 5 mm or less diam. then peduncles well over 2 cm.
3.
Venulation of lfts either imperceptible, or immersed and discolored on dorsal face, rarely the midrib weakly prominulous dorsally, but then simple.
4.
Plants of tropical dispersal in lowland s.-e., lowland w., and upland s.-w. Mexico, and local in Puerto Rico.
5.
Peduncles 11-23 mm; pod very long and stout, ± 100-140 x 5 mm, the replum 2-3 times as wide as valves; Puerto Rico 190e. var. urbaniana (p. 297).
5.
Peduncles mostly 15-30 mm, randomly less, but the pod then either shorter, or narrower, or both; continental Mexico.
6.
Lvs relatively short and simple, the longer lf-stks 2—6 cm and their pinnae 2(-3)-jug., the rachis of longer pinnae 10-20 mm, bearing 10-15 pairs of lfts; Gulf coastal plain and maritime dunes of Veracruz (and naturalized in Philippine Is.) 190a. var. quadrivalvis (p. 295).
6.
Lvs relatively ample, either the longer lf-stks 6-21 cm and their pinnae 3-5-jug., or the rachis of longer pinnae 2.5-6 cm, bearing 15-25(-30) pairs of lfts; Pacific lowlands and Pacific slope from Sinaloa s. and s.-e. to Oaxaca, inland to Michoacan and s.-w. Mexico.
7.
Replum and valves of pod strongly armed or hispid overall.
8.
Valves of pod ±1.5 mm wide, narrower than replum; lfts often (but not invariably) relatively ample, the longer ones ±6.5-13 x 1.8-3.5 mm; aculei of pod strong and recurved; stems mostly sharply 4-5-angled, with wide unarmed intervals between serially aculeate ribs 190b. var. distachya (p. 295).
8.
Valves of pod ±2.5 mm wide, broader than replum; lfts relatively short and narrow, the longer ones (4-)5-8 x 0.9-1.8(-2) mm; aculei of pod slender and almost straight; stems commonly slender and striately ribbed or subterete. ... 190c. var. jaliscensis (p. 296).
7.
Replum and valves of pod unarmed or only distantly weakly aculeate; prevailingly of lower foothills, coastal plain, or seashore, Sinaloa to Colima 190d. var. diffusa (p. 296).
4.
Plants of temperate and warm-temperate United States and extratropical Mexico (marginafly intratropical only in Sa.
Madre Oriental).
9.
Dispersed over Edwards Plateau in centr. and n.-centr. Texas, where strongly, almost exclusively calciphile; valves of pod 3-6 mm wide, distinctly wider than replum 190m. var. platycarpa (p. 302).
9.
Dispersed in United States either to w., or e., or s. of Edwards Plateau and s. into n.-e. Mexico, where approaching Edwards Plateau calcifuge; valves of pod no wider, commonly narrower than replum.
10.
Widespread over s.-e. United States, from Virginia to Florida, w. to e. Texas; seeds 3.2-5.2 mm long; pinnae of larger lvs 4-8-jug., the first pair inserted below middle of U-stk 190h. var. angustata (p. 299).
10.
Either of s. Texas or upland w. Texas and thence s. and w. into New Mexico and Chihuahua; seeds (5-)6-9 mm long; lf-formula as the preceding only in w. Texas and s.-w.-ward, in s. Texas the pinnae much fewer, and the first pair of pinnae inserted at or above middle of If-stk. 11.
Pinnae 5-9-jug.; w. Texas, s.-e. New Mexico, Chihuahua. .. 1901. var. occidentalis (p. 301).
11.
Pinnae 1-3-jug.; s. Texas and n.-e. Mexico 190n. var. nelsonii (p. 302).
3.
Venulation of lower face of lfts at once prominulous and pallid, the midrib giving rise on each side to one or more elevated secondary venules.
12.
Lfts obtuse or obscurely mucronulate; capitula without filaments mostly less than 7 mm diam.; centr. and n. Florida and n. just into Georgia 190i. war.fioridana(p. 300).
12.
Lfts sharply apiculate; capitula without filaments 7-11 mm diam.; central United States, w. of the Mississippi and e. of the High Plains, from S. Dakota to s.-centr. and s.-e. Texas, s.- w. Louisiana.
13.
Pod 55-120 mm long, prickly with discrete aculei, and the valves narrower than the replum at maturity; widespread in the range given 190j. var. nuttallii (p. 300).
13.
Pod 20-45 mm long, densely armed on all ribs with basally confluent aculei, the replum and valves of subequal width or the latter a little wider; s. and s.-e. Texas and s.-w. Louisiana 190k. var. hystricina (p. 301).
2.
Longer peduncles 4-ll(-13) mm; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam.; widespread over S. America, n. feebly through Caribbean Central America to s.-e. Mexico (Chiapas, Tabasco); Cuba.
14.
Pinnae of longer lvs 4-7-jug., the first pair arising below middle of If-stk; Colombia to e. Panama and e. Ecuador; Cuba 190f var. tetragona (p. 297).
14.
Pinnae of longer lvs 2-4-jug., the first pair arising at or commonly beyond middle of If-stk; whole range as given above except Cuba 190g. var. leptocarpa (p. 298).
Lfts of longer pinnae 5-9(-10)-jug.; pinnae l-3(-4)-jug. and the rachis of longer ones only 5-13 mm; s. Texas and n.-e. Mexico [if brought hither by plants of Edwards Plateau, Texas, cf var. platycarpa, p. 000].
15.
Venulation of lower face of lfts immersed; Texas s. of Edwards Plateau and s. in Mexico to e. San Luis Potosi 190o. var. latidens (p. 302).
15.
Venulation of lower face of lfts prominulous, the midrib branched at or above middle; n.-e. Mexico (Nuevo Leon and Coahuila), strongly calciphilous 190p. var. paucijuga (p. 303).
190a. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. quadrivalvis.
M. quadrivalvis Linnaeus, Sp. pi. 522.
1753, sens, str.—"Habitat in Vera Cruce.''— No typus in herb.
Linn., the description derived from manuscript of M. herbacea, procumbens et spinosa; caule quadrangulare, siliquis quadrivalvibus and accompanying "fig. bon."
of Houston, this subsequently published by Banks, Reliq. houstoun. t. 25.
1794, and independently described in part from cultivated plants grown from Houston's seeds, by Miller, Fig. pi. Gard. Diet.
182, fig. 1.
1760.- " .
.
. discovered by the late Dr. William Houston at La Vera Cruz, in New Spain, from whence he sent seeds .
.
. it spreads over the sands all round the town of Vera Cruz."
— Holotypus, Houston's manuscript and figure at ^JfNN.—Schrankia aculeata Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1041.
1806, nom. illeg. S. mexicana Rafinesque, New Fl.
1: 43.
1836, nom. illeg. Morongia aculeata (Willdenow) A. Heller, Cat. N. Amer. pi. 4.
1898.
Schrankia quadrivalvis (L.) Merrill, Philipp, J. Sci. 5: 30.
1910.
Leptoglottis quadrivalvis (L.) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 143.
1928.
Leptoglottis confusa Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3) 141.
1928. —"Veracruz [Mexico], F. Mueller -^007."—Holotypus, NYl—Schrankia confusa (Britton & Rose) Standley, Publ. Field Columbian Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 8: 13.
1930. (?) Schrankia (?) nova Schlechtendal ex Steudel, Nomencl. bot. ed. 2, 2: 535.
1841, nom. nud.—"Mexico."
—No typus found, but conjectured to be a plant collected by Schiede & Deppe in Veracruz, mentioned by Bentham, 1875: 441.
Stems coarse, sharply 4(-5)-angulate; leaf-formula ii(-iii)/10-13; longer lf-stks 2-6 cm, the petiole 1.5-3 cm; axis of longer pinnae ±1.5-2 cm; larger lfts ±5-8 x 1.5-2 mm; peduncles (8-) 10-30 mm; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam.; pods (22-)30-60 x 3.5-5 mm, the replum 2.5-5 mm, aculeate with either straight or recurved, basally discrete prickles 2-4 mm, the valves ±1.5 mm wide.
In savanna and on dunes along and near the Gulf coast in lowland centr. Veracruz, Mexico; long naturalized in Philippine Is. 190b. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. distachya (DeCandolle) Barneby, stat. nov. Schrankia distachya DeCandolle, Prodr. 2:443.
1825.—"(fl. mex. ic. ined.) .
.
. in Nova Hispania."
—Holotypus, sheet 6331.560 in the icones of Sesse & Mocino at the Hunt Library, Pittsburgh (sub Mimosa intsia)\—Leptoglottis distachya (DeCandolle) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 141.
1928.
Leptoglottispalmeri Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 143.
1928.—"Guadalajara, Jalisco.
Type collected July to October, 1886, [E.] Palmer 267."'-Holotypus, 'NYl—Schrankia palmeri (Britton & Rose) Standley, Publ. Field Columbian Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 8: 14.
1930.-Equated with S. distachya by McVaugh, 1987: 245, fig. 34 (pod).
Stems coarsely 4-5-angulate; leaf-formula iiiv/16-23; longer lf-stks (6-)8-21 cm, the petiole 4.5-11 cm, mostly longer than or equal to the rachis; rachis of longer pinnae 3-6 cm; longer lfts 6.5-13 X 1.8-3(-3.5) mm; longer peduncles (1-)1.5-3 cm; capitula without filaments 6.5-9.5 mm diam.; pods mostly 70-100 x ±3 mm, the valves ±1.5 mm wide, the replum 1.5-2 times wider, coarsely recurved-prickly with discrete aculei.
In open grassy or weedy, sometimes wet places, from the coastal plain to 1500 m, scattered through tropical w. Mexico from s. Sinaloa to Oaxaca, inland to centr. Jalisco and s.-w. Mexico.—Fl.
VII-X, sporadically later.
The var. distachya is very close to var. quadrivalvis, but is commonly a coarser plant, with larger leaves, a higher leaf-formula, and slightly plumper capitula and longer pods.
Its inland forms (including type ofL. palmeri) usually have narrower and more glabrous leaflets than those of the coastal lowlands, and at anthesis are difficult to distinguish from var. jaliscensis.
The present definition of var. distachya follows that of McVaugh (1987: 245).
190c. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. jaliscensis (Macbride) Beard [in sched.] ex Barneby, comb. nov. Schrankia quadrivalvis var. jaliscensis Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 10.
1919. —"Mexico: Guadalajara, Jalisco, Pringle, 4453 .
.
. also 5136; Rio Blanco, Palmer, 164 [in 1886]."-Lectotypus,Pn>z^/^^^5i, GH!; isotypus, NY!; syntypi.
Palmer 164, GH! W(\—Leptoglottis jaliscensis (Macbride) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 143.
1928.
Schrankia jaliscensis (Macbride) McVaugh, Fl. novo-galic.
5: 247, fig. 34 (pod).
1987.
Stems slender, subterete or striately pluricostate; leaf-formula (ii-)iii-v/15-26(-30); longer lfstks (4-)6-l 7 cm, the petiole (3-)4-8 cm, as long as or longer than rachis; rachis of longer pinnae 25-50(-55) mm; longer lfts (4-)5-8 x 0.9-1.8 mm; peduncles (0.5-)l .2-2.4 mm; capitula without filaments 5.5-7.5(-8) mm diam.; pods 40- 70 X 3-4 mm, the replum 1.5-2.5 mm wide, densely prickly with erect, nearly straight, discrete or in part basally confluent aculei, the valves 2-3 mm wide, as wide as or a little wider than replum.
In open oak or pine-oak woods, ± 1000-2100 m, scattered in the mountains of s.-w. Mexico from Sa.
Sumtato in Sinaloa s.-e. to Michoacan and Guerrero.-H. VII-X(-?).
I here adopt a definition of var. jaliscensis by its fmft (McVaugh, 1987, fig. 34, pro sp.), but find it impossible to distinguish, except by elevation of occurrence, flowering specimens from lowland var. diffusa at the same stage of maturity.
More than half the available material is in this ambiguous condition, and a sound taxonomy for these closely related Mexican forms requires much careful fieldwork and the correlation of vegetative as well as carpological characters with habitat and dispersal.
190d. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. diffusa (Rose) Beard [in sched.] ex Bameby, comb, nov. Schrankia diffusa Rose, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 1: 327, fig. 5.
1895.-"Very common along the beach .
.
.
Manzanillo [Colima, Mexico], December 1 to 31, 1981. [£".
Palmer] No. 1046."-Holotypus, US!; isotypus, N Y ! - Leptoglottis diffusa (Rose) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. H. 23(3): 141.
1928.-Maintained in specific rank by McVaugh, 1987: 244, fig. 246 (pod). (?) Mimosa geminata DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 427.
1825.—"... in Americae borealis ora occidentali... (fl. mex. ic. ined.)."—Lectotypus, a colored drawing.
No. 1884 of the Real Expedicion in the Sesse & Mociiio archive at Hunt Library, Pittsburgh! A less complete drawing in the same collection (no. 1867) appears to be conspecific.
Slides of both at NY! — Bentham (1876: 634) saw only a "very mde" copy of the original, and thought it might represent a species allied to M. fragrans (=M. borealis A. Gray).
In leaf-formula the drawing agrees also with var. quadrivalvis, but the locality on the west coast, which DeCandolle presumably learned from Mocifio himself at Geneva, points to var. diffusa.
The drawing cannot depict any known Mimosa other than M. quadrivalvis sens, lat., even though the idiosyncratic fruit of Schrankia is lacking.
Vegetatively intermediate between the two preceding, the stems strongly angulate or not, the lfts in size and outline more often like those of war.jaliscensis; leaf-formula ii-iii/12-22;pod ± 5- 12 cm long, the replum 2-5.5 mm, the valves ± 1.5-2 mm wide, all either unarmed or remotely short-aculeate.
In thickets or in open places within deciduous woodland and palm-forest, sometimes on rocky sea-shores, below (?) 400 m, scattered along the Pacific lowlands of Mexico from Sinaloa to Colima.
I have not found any certain way of distinguishing this taxon in the flowering condition, and am doubtful whether the nearly unarmed fmit is reliably diagnostic.
190e. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. urbaniana Bameby, nom. & stat. nov. Schrankia portoricensis Urban, Symb. antiU.
2: 267.
1900, hom. illeg.—"Hab. in Portorico prope Coamo in sylvis montanis ad San Ildefonso et in declivibus umbrosis in convalli El Tendal, autumno fl., m. Dec. fruct.: Sintenis 3162, 3199, Stahls.n."
—Lectotypus, Sintenis 3199 (fr), +B; isotypi, BM! NY (3 sheets)!—Non Mimosa portoricensis Jacquin, 1191.—Morongia portoricensis (Urban) Britton in Britton & Wilson, Sci. Surv.
Porto Rico & Virgin Is. 5(3): 357.
1924.
Leptoglottis portoricensis (Urban) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 140.
1928.
Morongia leptoclada [sic, sphalm. pro leptocarpa] sensu Cook & Collins, Contr. U.S. Nafl.
Herb. 8(2): 194.
1903.
Habit of robust var. angustata or var. tetragona; leaf-formula iv-vii/14-18; longer lf-stks 7-16 cm, the petiole 3.5-5.5 cm, mostly shorter than rachis; rachis of longer pinnae ±2-3.5 cm, the longer lfts 4.5-7.5 x 0.7-1.4 mm (±6-7 times as long as wide), all glabrous, the venation immersed; peduncles 11-23 mm; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam.; pods (including slender beak 20-23 mm) 12-14 cm x 5 mm, the 5-ribbed replum 2-4 mm, the valves 2.5-3.5 mm wide, glabrous, armed with scattered or remote aculei.
In open bmsh-woodland and in grassy places at low elevation on the s. slope of Cordillera Central in s.-e. Puerto Rico (Coamo; Cayey).— Fl.
VII-XII. Map 26.
The geographically isolated var. urbaniana is assumed to be native and endemic to Puerto Rico because it differs from allopatric varieties that resemble it in foUage by a fifth rib on the pod's replum and by relatively short peduncles.
Its restricted known range on the island coincides, interestingly and suggestively, with that of Senna pendula var. stahlii (Urban) Irwin & Barneby (1982: 393), a detached but only weakly differentiated derivative of a complex highly diversified in South America.
In length of peduncle var. urbaniana is intermediate between South American var. leptocarpa and North American vars. distachya and angustata, but the high ovule number (20-30) leans toward the South American elements of the species.
190f. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. tetragona (Poiret) Bameby, stat. nov. M. tetragona Poiret, Encycl. suppl. 1: 56.
1810, legitimately substituted for Schrankia hamata Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1042.
1806, non M. hamata Willdenow, op. cit.
1033.—^'Habitat in America meridionali.'', the locality elaborated by Kunth in Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, Nov. gen. sp. 6(qu): 260.
1824: "Crescit prope Mompox in ripa fluminis Magdalenae, ad confluentem Caucam [Bolivar, Colombia]."-Holotypus, B-WILLD 19098, seen in photograph at NY commun.
Harms, 19261—Leptoglottis hamata (Humboldt & Bonpland) Standley, J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 15: 458.
1925.
Schrankia hamata sensu Bentham, 1876: 441.
Leptoglottis hamata sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 144; Britton & Killip, 1936: 148.
Stems coarse, sharply 4-5-angulate and smooth between the angles; leaf-formula iv-v/14-22; longer lf-stks 8-14 cm, the petiole 3.5-6 cm, shorter than If-rachis; rachis of longer pinnae 3- 6 cm; longer lfts 5-10 x 1-2.4 mm, the slender venulation dorsally discolored but immersed; peduncles 4-10 mm; capitula without filaments 5- 5.5 mm diam.; filaments "white";/7c><i5 including long sterile beak (6-)8-10.5 cm, without armature 4.5-5.5 mm diam., the 4-ribbed replum 3 - 4.5 mm wide, the valves 1-1.5 mm wide, all densely hispid with basally discrete but subcontiguous, straight setaculei to 2.5-4 mm.
In thickets, in forest clearings, and on riverbanks, below 150 m, known from scattered localities in centr. Panama, inter-Andean valleys of n. and centr. Colombia, Pacific lowlands of s. Colombia (Narifio), and from one locality in Amazonian Ecuador (Pastaza); reported from s. MIMOSA QUADRIVALVIS (ex parte); var. LEPTOCARPA# var. TETRAGONA var. URBANIANA MAP 26. and Mexico.
Parts of Central and South America.
Range of M. quadrivalvis Linnaeus outside of United States Oriente, Cuba (environs of El Caney, Santiago de Cuba) by Bassler, Feddes Repert.
101(7-8): 333-339 + fig. 1990, where perhaps naturalized.—Fl.
IX-II, perhaps in other months.— Lambedera; rabo de iguana.
Map 26.
The var. tetragona resembles var. leptocarpa in small, shortly pedunculate capitula, but differs somewhat in leaf-formula and in relative lengths ofpetiole and leaf-rachis.
Specimens suggest that it may be a coarser plant, and collectors have noted only white filaments.
Mexican var. distachya is similar in stout angulate stems, but has fatter capitula bome on a longer peduncle.
190g. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. leptocarpa (DeCandolle) Barneby, stat. nov. Schrankia leptocarpa DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 443.
1825. —"in Sancto-Domingo.
Poiteau."
—Holotypus, perhaps really from French Guiana, G-T>C\—Leptoglottis leptocarpa (DeCandolle) Standley, J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 15: 458.
1925. (?) Schrankia trijuga Ramirez Goyena, Fl. nicarag.
1: 379.
1909.—No precise locality other than Nicaragua of the book-title.—No typus known to exist, but the If-foraiula in the protologue suggesting var. leptocarpa.
S. argentinensis Burkart, Legum. Argent.
2 * * ^ ed., 116, fig. 15, c-f, 542.
1952.-"Argentina: Misiones, Corr[ientes]."—No typus seen, but the species ofMisiones, as represented by Ekman 1627 (NY), e.g., is not different from var. lepotocarpa of Paraguay and extratropical Brazil.
S. leptocarpa sensu Bentham, 1875: 442, 1876: 391, t. 99.
Leptoglottis leptocarpa sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 142; Britton & KiUip, 1936: 148; Burkart, 1979: 125, est. 18; Lewis, 1987, fig. 7Q. Stems commonly 4-angulate; leaf-formula iiiv/12-22(-24) mm; lf-stks 4-16 cm, the petiole at least as long as and usuaUy longer than rachis, the 1-3 interpinnal segments to (0.8-) 1-3.5 cm; rachis of longer pinnae 2-6 cm; lfts near midrachis (4-)5.5-13 X (1-)1.2-2.8(-3) mm, dorsally 2-4-nerved from pulvinule, the venulation immersed or almost so; peduncles 4-12(-l 3) mm; capitula without filaments 4-5(-5.5) mm diam.; flowers relatively smaU, ±1.8-2.3 mm; pods (6-)8-17cm X 3^.5 mm, the beak (6-)8-17(-28) mm, the replum 2-3.5(-4) mm and the valves (1-) 1.2-3 mm wide, both armed with perpendicular setaculei (1.5-)2-4 mm, these variably crowded or remote but not basally confluent, the whole fruit either glabrous or minutely granular (but not puberulent) overall.
In sandy campo, savanna thickets, light woodland, and becoming abundant in disturbed ground, along highways and in abandoned pastures, mostly below 300 but ascending in Bahia and Minas Gerais to 1000 m, widespread over S. America e. of the Andes, from n. Colombia and Venezuela s. to n.-e. Bolivia, Paraguay, n.- e. Argentina, and in Brazil to Sta. Catarina, feebly n. into Panama, (?) Nicaragua, Belize, and s. Mexico (Chiapas, Tabasco), and in the Lesser Antilles to Martinique; described from Hispaniola, but not seen there in modem times.—Fl. indefinitely through the year at equatorial latitudes, in summer s.-ward.
Map 26.
A combination of relatively long true petioles, short unarmed peduncles, and smaU capitula with relatively short filaments (exserted 2.5-3.5, rarely 5 mm) distinguishes var. leptocarpa, the only representative of M. quadrivalvis over most of South America.
The cytology of var. leptocarpa and related forms is in need of systematic study.
FrahmLeliveld (Rev. Cytol.
Biol.
Veg. 18: 277.
1957) found 2n = 52 in unidentified material of Schrankia leptocarpa, and 2n = 40 is indicated in annotation of a specimen (Baldwin 4520, NY) from Para, Brazil.
190h. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. angustata (Torrey & Gray) Bameby, comb, nov., based on autonym generated by Schrankia angustata var. brachycarpa Chapman, 1865, q.v. infra. S. angustata Torrey & Gray, Fl.
N. Amer. 1:400.
1840.—"5. uncinata [sensu] Elliott.
Sk.
2 p. 158 (at least in part, ex spec!).
.
.
S. Carolina! Georgia! Texas, Dmmmond!"—Lectotypus, Drummonds.n.,
NY (hb. Torrey.
!), the only fruiting specimen that could have suggested the epithet, which refers to the legume "subulate-attenuate at the apex"; syntypus, Elliott s.n. (fl), NY (hb. Torrey.
!).
M. microphylla Dryander in J. E. Smith, Nat. hist, lepidopt.
Georgia 2: 123.
1787.—No locality given other than Georgia, in the book-title.—Holotypus, the plate at page cited! = var. angustata sens, lat., but the pod not shown, the particular variant therefore unknowahle.—Morongia microphylla (Dryander) Britton in Britton & Brown, 111.
Fl. n. U.S., ed. 2, 2: 334.
1913.
Leptoglottis microphylla (Dryander) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. H. 23(3): 142.
1928.
M. horridula Michaux, R. bor.-amer.
2: 1803.-"HAB. a Virginia ad Floridam."
—Holotypus, P (hb. Michaux.)! = photo s.n. ex ISC, showing dorsal face of lfts in enlargement, NY! = the variant with shorter, densely aculeate pod.—Schrankia uncinata Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1043.
1806, nom. illeg. S. horridula (Michaux) Chapman, R. South.
U.S. ed. 2, 683.
1892.
Morongia uncinata (Willdenow) Britton, Mem. Torrey Bot. Club 5: 191.
1894, nom. illeg. Morongia horridula (Michaux) A. Heller, Cat. N. Amer. pi. 5.
1898.
Schrankia angustata ? var. brachycarpa Chapman, R. South.
U.S. 116.
1865.-"Dry pine barrens, Rorida to North Carolina, and westward."
—Two sheets from hb. Chapman.,
so identified in Chapman's hand, one from "Rorida," NY! = the variant with shorter, more densely aculeate pod, the same as the preceding.— Leptoglottis chapmanii Small ex Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 141.
1928.
Schrankia chapmani [sic] (Small) F. J. Hermann, J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 38: 237.
1948.
S. horridula var. ? angularis Chapman, R. South.
U.S. ed. 3, 127.
1897.—"Dry open woods in the upper districts."
—Lectotypus (Isely, 1971a: 239): Chapman s.n.,
"near Rome, Georgia .
.
.,
" US! = the variant with relatively long, more distantly aculeate pod.—Morongia horridula var. angularis (Chapman) A. Heller, Cat. N. Amer. pi. 5.
1898.
Leptoglottis halliana Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 141.
1928.-"Sandy hills, Hemstead [Waller Co.], Texas, June 1, 1912, Elihu Hall 777."—Holotypus, NY! = the form with long slender, sparsely aculeate pod equivalent to typical var. angustata; isotypus, K! L. angustisiliqua Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 143.
1928.—"Type from Brogdon Hammock, Dade County, Rorida, June 19, 1915, [/.
7^.] Small <Si[C. A.] Mosier 65^9."—Holotypus, NY! = the variant with exceptionally narrow, distantly aculeolate pod found in s. peninsular Florida.—Schrankia angustisiliqua (Britton & Rose) F. J. Hermann, J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 38: 237.
1948.
Leaf-formula (iii-)iv-vrii/(9-)10-17(-19); longer lf-stks (6-)7-15 cm, the petiole (1.5-)2-4 cm, shorter than rachis; rachis of longer pinnae (10_)14_42 mm; longer lfts 2.5-7.5 x 0.6-1.7 mm, the venation immersed, either discolored or imperceptible dorsally; peduncles 2-6 cm; capitula without filaments 5-7.5 mm diam.; pod polymorphic in dimensions and armature, either a) elongate, 8-13 cm with long sterile beak, discounting prickles 3-4.5 mm diam., or b) of simUar length but only (2-)2.5-3 mm diam., or c) only 4-8 cm long, often more shortly beaked and more densely prickly with basally confluent aculei, the replum (2-)2.2-3.5 mm and the valves (1.7-)2-2.5 mm wide, the whole either glabrous or puberulent; seeds 14-20(-24).
In open sunny places on sandy or loamy soils of pine-palmetto savanna and mixed deciduous woodland of the coastal plain and piedmont, becoming weedy in fallow ground, along highways, and in waste places, widespread and frequent from far w. Virginia and s.-e. Kentucky to s. peninsular Florida, s.-w. to s. Louisiana and e. Texas (Isely, 1973, map 46, sub Schrankia microphylla, but this excluding the Texan populations shown by Tumer, 1939: 46, map 16).—Fl.
IV-X, into winter in subtropical Florida.
Except for nomenclature, contingent on the taxonomy, my concept of var. angustata coincides with Schrankia microphylla sensu Isely (1971a, 1973) except in this respect: I follow Turner (1959) by including Leptoglottis halliana, the lectotype of Schrankia angustata, and similar east-Texan schrankias with leaf-formula of iiivi/ 12-18 and long narrow pods, which appear to me indistinguishable from some populations in Florida.
These controversial taxa were transferred by Isely to Schrankia latidens, but contradict the contrasting morphological definitions presented in his key and discussion (1971a: 234, 236).
There appears to be a narrow gap in the known dispersal of var. angustata in Louisiana between the lower Mississippi and lower Sabine rivers, but this gap cannot outweigh morphological congruence between plants found to the east and west.
The variation in length and armature of the fruit of var. angustata was noted by Chapman, and has given rise to a number of proposed segregates; these, however, as Isely has ably demonstrated, lack geographic patterns, except insofar as the state with short, usually burrlike but sometimes only thinly aculeate pod, is not encountered at the southern and western extremities of the dispersal range.
No significant correlation has been found between length, girth, pubescence, and armature of fruit, which vary independently of one another.
Occasional plants in Florida have incipiently elevated midrib on back of leaflets, suggesting passage into yar. floridana.
190i. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. floridana (Chapman) Bameby, comb. nov. Schrankia floridana Chapman, Fl.
South.
U.S. ed. 2, SuppL 2, 683.
1892.-"Sandy barrens, South Rorida."
-No typus found by Isely (1971a: 244) in hb. Chapman, at US; fragments at l^fV"! annotated by Britton as "from the type specimen" were collected at Manatee, Florida by J. H. Simpson.—Morongia floridana (Chapman) A. Heller, Cat. N. Amer. pi. 4.
1898.
Leptoglottis floridana (Chapman) Small ex Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 139.
1928.
Schrankia microphylla var. floridana (Chapman) Isely, Castanea 51: 402.
1986.
Schrankia uncinata sensu auct. plur.; non Willdenow (q.v. sub var. angustata).
Essentially like the sympatric forms of var. angustata with relatively long, long-beaked, distantly aculeate pods, but the lfts prominulously pallid-venulose dorsally, the midrib 1-2- branched above mid-blade or rarely simple.
In palmetto scrub and on white sands of middle and n.-e. Rorida and extreme s.-e. Georgia, within and partly overlapping the range of var. angustata (Isely, 1973, map 48, sub Schrankia floridana).—¥1.
IV-IX. The var. floridana resembles var. nuttallii in leaflet-venation, but the leaflets are only minutely apiculate or obtuse, not sharply triangular-apiculate, and the capitula are on the average smaller.
190j. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. nuttallii (DeCandolle) Beard [in sched.] ex Barneby, stat. nov. Leptoglottis nuttallii DeCandolle, Mem. Legum. 8:451.
1827.—"Hab. in Americae borealis territorio Arkansano (V.S. in herb.
Mercier.)."—Holotypus, G; clastotypus + tracing and floral analysis by B. P. G. Hochreutiner sent to Britton in 1926, ISTY! presumptive isotypus, NuttaU s.n.,
""Schrankia *reticulata.
Arkansa".,
ISTY!—Ifbelieved to be ineffectively pubUshed, due to DeCandoUe's adverbial use of the term provisoire in the protologue of genus Leptoglottis, the basionym dates to: DecandoUe ex Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 139.
192^.-Schrankia nuttallii (DeCandolle) Standley, Publ. Field Columbian Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 8:13.
1930.
Leptoglottis mimosoides Small ex Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 139.
1928.-"Near Fort Worth, Texas [10 May, fl, 19 Jul, fr].
Albert Ruth 13."
- Lectotypus, the flowering element, NY! the fruiting syntypus, mounted on same sheet, = M. quadrivalvis var. platycarpa.
Leaf-formula iv-vii(-viii)/(10-)ll-16(-18); Ifstk of longer lvs 5-10(-l 1) cm, the petiole (1.5-)2- 4 cm, shorter than rachis; rachis of longer pinnae 15-35(-45) mm, the longer lfts (3-)3.5-8 x 1- 2.2(-2.4) mm, all sharply apiculate, the midrib beneath pallid and prominent, 1-2-branched on each side above mid-blade; peduncles (2-)3-8.5(- 10) cm; capitula without filaments 7-11 mm diam.; pods 5.5-12 cm, the replum 2.5-3.5 and the valves 2-2.5 mm wide, prickly overall with either straight or subrecurved, basally either discrete or in part confluent, rarely mutually distant aculei to 2-3.5 mm.
On treeless prairie and in woodland glades, becoming weedy in disturbed places and along highways, widespread over the centr. United States w. of the Mississippi R., from centr. S. Dakota, w. Iowa and Missouri s. to centr. Louisiana and s.-centr, Texas, w. on the plains of Nebraska, Kansas and Panhandle Texas to about the 450 m contour (Isely, 1973, map 45, sub Schrankia).-Fl. (IV-)V-VII. 190k. Mimosa quadrivalvis var. hystricina (Small) Bameby, comb. nov. Leptoglottis hystricina Small ex Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 139.
1928.-"Type from Hemstead [Waller Co.], Texas, May 1, 1872, Elihu Hall 770. "
- H o l o t y p u s , NY!; isotypus, K ! - Schrankia hystricina (Small) Standley, Publ. Field Columbian Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 8: 13.
1930.
S. nuttallii var. hystricina (Small) Isely, Castanea 51: 205.
1986.
Except for potentially more vigorous growth and longer peduncles essentially like var. nuttallii, the lf-formula and Ift-venation indistinguishable, but the pod at once shorter and broader, very densely aculeate; peduncles mostly 5-12 cm but said to attain 20 cm in fmit; pods 20-45 mm long, without armament 4-5 mm diam.. bluntly tetragonal or moderately compressed laterally, the replum 2-2.5 mm and valves 2.5-3.5 mm wide, all armed with erect, crowded, basally confluent aculei to 2.5-5.5 mm.
In moist sandy prairies and open pinewoods of the Gulf coastal plain in e. Texas and w. Louisiana, in Texas randomly inland an unknown distance (Isely, 1973, map 45), the limit uncertain due to difliculty in distinguishing flowering plants from vicariant var. nuttallii.—Fl.
IV-VII. 1901.
Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. occidentalis (Wooton & Standley) Bameby, stat. nov. Morongia occidentalis Wooton & Standley, Contr. U.S. NatL Herb. 16: 135.
1913.- "Type.
.
. collected near Nara Visa [Quay Co., New Mexico], July 4, 1911, by Mr. Geo. L. Fisher (no. 190).
.
. ."-Holotypus, US 6606121; clastotypus (fragm), NYl—Leptoglottis occidentalis (Wooton & Standley) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 140.
1928.
Schrankia occidentalis (Wooton & Standley) Standley, Publ. Field Columbian Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 8: 13.
1930.
Leaf-formula (v-)vi-ix/10-16; longer lf-stks (6-)7-17 cm, the petiole 2-4 cm, obviously shorter than If-rachis; rachis of longer pinnae 10- 25 mm; larger lfts (2-)3-7(-9.5) x 0.7-2.3 mm, the venation immersed; peduncles (1.5-)2^.5 cm; capitula without filaments 7-9.5 mm diam.; pods attaining 13 cm, either glabrous or (sometimes even the aculei) puberulent overall, the replum 2.2-3.5 mm and valves 2-3 mm wide; seeds to 5-7(-9) X ±3.5 mm.
On dunes and sandy prairies or roadsides, scattered over the high plains of s.-e. New Mexico and n.-w. Texas e. of the Pecos River (Isely, 1973, map 47, sub Schrankia), and disjunct on the Samalayuca Dunes in n. Chihuahua.—R. (IV-)VVIIL Relatively short and numerous pinnae, and a consequently narrow leaf-outline, are the principal characters that distinguish var. occidentalis.
The valves of the pod vary from distinctly narrower to quite as wide as the replum; at the latter extreme the fruit closely approximates that of var. platycarpa and var. latidens.
Both of these have as a rule fewer pinnae, and var. latidens also fewer leaflets per pinna and smaller capitula.
At the northeastern edge of its range in Texas var. occidentalis appears to be vicariant with var. nuttallii, extremely similar except for prominent dorsal venulation of the leaflets.
The relatively large seeds, noticed by McGregor (in R. Great Plains 410.
1986), are notable but not invariably diagnostic.
190m. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. platycarpa (A. Gray) Barneby, stat. nov. Schrankia platycarpa A. Gray, J. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist. 6: 183.
1^50.—''[Lindheimer ¥asc.
Ill] 384 .
.
.
Dry, stony prairies.
New Braunfels [Comal Co., Texas]."—Holotypus, GH!; isotypi, MO! NY! (?) M. roemeriana Scheele, Linnaea 21: 456.
1848.— "Prope Neubraunfels [Comal Co., Texas], leg. [Ferdinand] Romer."
—No typus known to survive; it was equated by A. Gray (1850, I.e. supra) inconclusively and by Bentham (1875: 442) without equivocation with S. platycarpa, but as Romer's plant had (ex char.) a leaf-formula of i-iv/±8, which is consistent with that of var. latidens, and lacked the diagnostic fruit first collected by Lindheimer, the roemeriana — platycarpa equation is far from sure.— Morongia roemeriana (Scheele) A. Heller, Contr. Herb. Franklin & MarshaU Coll. 1:44.
1895.
Schrankia roemeriana (Scheele) Blankinship, Annual Rep. Missouri Bot. Gard. 18: 168.
1907 (deficient in citation of antecedent).
Leptoglottis roemeriana (Scheele) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 140.
1928.
Leptoglottis reverchonii Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 140.
1928.—"Calcareous prairies, among rocks, Dallas, Texas, May [fl], June [fr], 1877, /.
Reverchon."
—\jtQXotypn%, 2 fruiting stems at left of sheet, collected in June, NY!; thefloweringsyntypus is conspecific—Equated with Schrankia roemeriana by Tumer, Leg. Tex. 47.
1959.
Leaf-formula iii-vii/(8-)9-14; longer lf-stks (3-)4-8.5 cm, the petiole 1.5-4(-4.5) cm, as long as or shorter than rachis; rachis of longer pinnae 10-26 mm, the longer lfts (3.5-)4-8 x 1.2-2mm, the venation fully immersed or rarely the simple midrib dorsally prominulous; peduncles 2-7(-10) cm; capitula without filaments 7-9.5 mm diam.; pods (2.5-)4-9 cm, the densely aculeate replum 1-2 mm, the low-convex valves 3-6 mm wide.
In stony calcareous soils of mesquite-grassland and thin oak woodland, locally abundant on Edwards Plateau in centr. and n.-centr. Texas s.- ward from the Red River valley to the middle Rio Grande, perhaps in adj. Mexico (Isely, 1973, map 47, sub Schrankia roemeriana).—¥1. (iv-)vviii(-ix).
190n. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. nelsonii (Britton & Rose) Bameby, stat. nov. Leptoglottis nelsonii Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 142.
1928.-"Sabinas, Coahuila, May 21, 1902, [E. W.] Nelson 6550."-Holotypus, US!; isotypus, NY! (?) Schrankia subinermis S. Watson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 17: 350.
1882. —"In the mountains north of Monclova [Coahuila, Mexico] ([E. Palmer] 302)."
— Holotypus, GH; isotypus, NY! Stems slender, less than 1 m; leaf-formula iiii/9-14; longer lf-stks (2-)4.5-8 cm, the petiole 2—4 cm, as long as or longer than rachis; rachis of longer pinnae 10-25 mm; larger lfts 4-6 x 0.8-1.4 mm, all subglaucescent and the venation faint immersed; peduncles (1.3-)2-5 cm; capitula without filaments 6-8 mm diam.; pods including elongate sterile beak 6-9 cm long, without prickles 3-5 mm diam., the replum 2-3 and valves 1-2 mm wide, all distantly or remotely aculeolate or almost smooth; seeds 10-14(-?), ±6-6.5 mm long. Dry sandy or gravelly places, mostly below 200 m, apparently local on the plains of s. Texas s.- ward from San Antonio, s.-w. into n.-e. Coahuila.-R. IV-IX. The var. nelsonii is a critical entity, poised morphologically between vars. latidens, angustata, and occidentalis.
It agrees with var. latidens in number of pinnae per leaf, but in number of leaflets per pinna and in relatively long and thinly aculeate, long-beaked pod it approaches the Texan form of var. angustata; the long seeds are in the size-range of var. occidentalis.
It contributed to the amorphous (because over-comprehensive) concept of Schrankia latidens proposed by Isely (1971a).
The status of Schrankia subinermis requires field-study.
The type differs from other examples of var. nelsonii in having only one pair, not two or three pairs, of pinnae per leaf, and the leafletnumber (in few surviving leaves) is transitional to var. latidens.
The large seeds are those of var. nelsonii.
190o. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. latidens (Small) Bameby, stat. nov. Morongia latidens SmaU, BuU.
New York Bot. Gard. 2: 98.
1901.—"In dry soU, Kenedy, Kames County, Texas.
Type, [A. A.] Heller, PI.
So.
Texas, ho.
1779."-Holotypus, ISTY!; isotypus, NY ex BKL\—Schrankia latidens (Small) K. Schumann in Engler, Just's Bot. Jahresber.
29(1): 540.
1903.
Leptoglottis latidens (Small) SmaU ex Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 142.
1928. (?) Leptoglottis potosina Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 143.
1928.-"Minas de San Rafael, San Luis Potosi, May, 1911, [C. A.] Purpus 5777."-Holotypus, US!; isotypus, NY!—Equated with Schrankia latidensby Isely (1971a), but pod required for certain identification.
L. berlandieri Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 144.
1928.-"Between Goliad and Bexar, Southern Texas, May, 1834, Berlandier 2513."
— Holotypus, NY!; isotypi, GH! K!—First noticed, as a doubtful, unnamed variety of Schrankia aculeata, by Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30:441.
1875; equated with S. latidens by Tumer, Leg. Tex. 46.
1959.
Stems relatively slender and proximally sharply angulate; leaf-formula i-iii/5-9(-10); longer lfstks 2-7 cm, the petiole 2-4.5 cm, as long as or longer than rachis; rachis of longer pinnae 5-13 mm; larger lfts 2.5-6.5 x 0.6-1.7 mm, the venation immersed or imperceptible; longer peduncles 2-4.5(-7.5) cm; capitula without filaments 5-7 mm diam.;/70fi?(3-)3.5-6.5 cm X ±3.5 mm, the replum 1.5-2.5 mm, the valves 1-1.8 mm wide, distinctly narrower than to almost as wide as replum, all discretely or distantly (remotely) armed with stout, erect or gently recurved aculei to 1.5-2.5(-3) mm and either glabrous or puberulent overall; seeds mostly 8-12.
Sandy prairies and gravelly hillsides in subdesertic scrub, becoming colonial in disturbed places or on roadsides, mostly below 300 (in Texas below 150) m, common on the sandy plains and coastal prairies of s.-e. Texas in the United States and s.-w. erratically in e. Mexico to ±22°30'N in e. San Luis Potosi.-R. IV-VIII(- ?).
190p. Mimosa quadrivalvis Linnaeus var. paucijuga (Britton & Rose) Beard [in sched.] ex Bameby, stat. nov. Leptoglottis paucijuga Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 139.
1928.- "Type from Monterey, Nuevo Leon, [Major] Eaton & [Dr.] Edwards.'"—Yiolotypus, N Y ! - Schrankia uncinata var. Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 442.
1875.
Leptoglottis regiomontana Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 140.
1928.-"Bella Vista, Monterey, Nuevo Leon, 540 m altitude.
May, 1911, BrotherArsene 6132 [coU.
Brother Abbon 76]."-Holotypus, NY! Stems slender, distantly foliate; leaf-formula i-iii/5-8; longer lf-stks 1.5-4.5 cm, the petiole 1-2.5 cm, as long as or longer than the rachis; rachis of longer pinnae 6-11 mm; lfts attaining 2.5-5.5 X 1-1.7 mm, the midrib prominulous dorsally and 1-2-branched above mid-blade; peduncles 1.5-4 cm; capitula without filaments 5- 7 mm diam.; pods (17-)20-50 x 3-4 mm, the replum 1.5-2.5 mm, the valves 2-3 mm wide, distantly or more densely but then discretely prickly with straight or subrecurved aculei to ± 2- 3 mm, either glabrous or densely puberulent overall; seeds ±8-10.
In calcareous desert mostly below 500 m, apparently uncommon in e. Coahuila from Piedras Negras s. to Saltillo, e. into adj. Nuevo Leon and Tamaulipas, in extratropical n.-e. Mexico.—R. IV-IX(-?).
The var. paucijuga duplicates var. latidens in everything but prominulous dorsal venation of the leaflets.
The relatively small fruits, like those of var. latidens, vary from glabrous to densely puberulent.
Leptoglottis regiomontana, described as glabrous throughout, in reality has finely villosulous pods.
B(xxv).
Series P L U R I J U G A E Karsten Mimosa sect. Batocaulon ser. Plurijugae Karsten.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Plurijugae Karsten, R. Columb.
2: 61.
1863.—Sp. typica (unica): M. spiciflora Karsten = M. invisa Martius ex Colla var. spiciflora (Karsten) Barneby.
Schranckia [sic] sect. Rhodostachya Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 414.
1842.—Sp. lectotypica: S. rhodostachya Bentham = Mimosa invisa Martius ex Colla var. invisa.
Mimosa sect. Eumimosa ser. Spiciflorae Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 407.
1875, ex parte (spp. 104-107, duabus ultimis, nectario petiolari munitis, exclusis), nom. superfl.—Sp. lectotypica: M. spiciflora Karsten = M. invisa Martius ex Colla var. spiciflora.
M. XXIX Argillotrophae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 148, in clave.
1928.-Sp. unica: M. argillotropha B. L. Robinson = M. leptocarpa Rose.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Spiciflorae sensu Bentham, 1876: 343 [misattributed to Karsten, whose epithet was ^'Plurijugae," vide supra], ex parte (spp. 94, 95 exceptis).
MicrophyUidious, diffuse or scandent, softwoody shrubs and subshrubs armed on stems and often on If-axes and peduncles with files of recurved cat's-claw aculei, the inflorescence composed of many globose, oblong, or cylindric-spiciform capitula, these either axillary to coeval or to hysteranthous lvs, or (M. leptocarpa, M. lemniscata) forming a terminal efoliate panicle.
Indumentum of fine short hairs and granular discolored trichomes, glandular hairs and setae lacking.
Stipules triangular-lanceolate or setiform, mostly 1 -nerved, persistent or tardily deciduous.
Leaf-formula (ii-)iii-xxi/7-50, the Ifstk usually espiculate, the larger lfts 2-9(-12) x 0.4-5 mm, l-2(-3)-nerved.
Peduncles l-4(-5) per node, less than 2 cm; axis ofpartial inflorescences 1-85 mm, flowers (4-)5(-6)-merous, haplostemonous, in few fls of M. leptocarpa stamens randomly 6-8(-9), some lower fls of each spike or capitulum usually staminate; calyx campanulate 0.2-1 mm, the rim subtruncate or obscurely lobulate, often granular-fimbriolate; corolla 1.3-3.2 mm, the lobes 1 -nerved; filaments pink or white, free or almost so, exserted 1.5-7(-8) mm.
Pods usually at least shortly stipitate, rarely sessile, in profile broadly linear, 30-145 x (5-)8-22 mm, piano-compressed, the unarmed or sometimes retro-aculeate replum 0.4-1.1 mm wide, the papery valves breaking when ripe into free-falling, mostly indehiscent articles; ovules (8-) 10-20.
Spp. five, four poorly known and of controversial status, of wide dispersal in n. and e. South America, both n. and s. of Amazonia, one extending disjunctly n.-w. to El Salvador and s. Mexico, and one endemic to lowland s.-w. Mexico.
The members ofser.
Plurijugaeknown in 1875- 1876, all now thought to represent geographical varieties of a polymorphic M. invisa Martius ex Colla (non Martius), were grouped by Bentham in a series Spiciflorae alongside the fundamentally different, albeit also haplostemonous M. myriadenia sens, lat., and the series itself subordinated, because of haplostemony, to sect. Mimosa.
The Plurijugae are here interpreted as advanced representatives of sect. Batocaulon, differing from sect. Mimadenia (i.e., M. myriadenia and related diplostemonous species) in a broad anther-connective and in lack both of petiolar nectaries and of speciaUzed peltate trichomes; and differing from sect. Mimosa, sensu restricto, by an indumentum composed of fine plain hairs and discolored granules (but no setae) and by relatively high ovule-number (8 upward).
The close affinity of ser. Plurijugae lies with ser. Paucifoliatae, from which it differs principally in loss of antepetalous stamens and in elongation, in some species only, of the fforal axis.
The nucleus of Mimosa sect. Spiciflorae Bentham, which was mistakenly called "ser. Spiciflorae Karsten" in Flora brasiliensis, consisted of species with definitely spicate, oblong or cylindric units of infforescence, but is here expanded to admit M. antioquiensis and its close relatives M. lemniscata and M. leptocarpa, which have the capitate partial infforescences stabilized in ser. Paucifoliatae.
The association within one and the same series of species with capitate and spicate partial infforescence, accepted by Bentham as unavoidable in ser. Lepidotae (sect. Calothamnos of this revision) but admitted nowhere else in the genus, is now familiar from scattered instances in sect. Habbasia (M. miranda, M. chacoensis), in sect. Mimadenia (M. pithecolobioides), and in sect. Mimosa (M. niederleinii, M. dutrae) of spikes in a context of otherwise stabilized capitula.
Beyond the species of Plurijugae described and named below, an imperfect specimen from Ecuador (El Oro: Penjamo, 30 m, dry barranca, fls violet-red, L. Albert de Escobar 827, TEX) hints at the existence of a fourth species with capitate flowers, or possibly at a significant range-extension ofAf. antioquiensis.
A short description may remind collectors on the Pacific lowlands of Ecuador to be on the lookout for this weedy but interesting mimosa.
Weak, distantly foliate herb (?) with habit and cat's-claw armament of a schrankia, the many small globose capitula fasciculate by 3-4 in a long series of If-axils.
Stipules ±3 x 0.3 mm.
Lf-formula ±vii/20-25, the whole If-stk 11-16 cm, the petiole 3.5-4.5 cm, the interpinnal segments 2- 2.5 cm; lfts narrowly linear from angulate base, subapiculate, the longer ones 5-6.5 x 0.6-1 mm, faintly 3-nerved beneath, the midrib centric and faintly pinnate beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles 12- 17(-?) mm; calyx campanulate ±0.5 mm, glabrous; fls 5-merous 5-androus, not seen expanded, the buds microscopically papillate.
Conspectus of ser. Plurijugae Mimosa * Rs in loose spikes or in oblong capitula at least 1.5 times as long as wide; corolla-lobes spreading, shallowly concave ventraUy; filaments pink; e. Brazil to n. Venezuela and Colombia.
191. mvwa Martius ex Colla II. subsp. 5;7/c//7ora (Karsten) Bameby 1. subsp. invisa a. var. spiciflora a. var. invisa b. var. tovarensis (Bentham) Bameby b. var. macrostachya (Bentham) Bameby 192. falconis Bameby ** Rs in globose capitula; corolla-lobes spreading, shallowly concave ventrally; filaments white; n. Colombia and lowland s.-w. Mexico.
193. lemniscata bamehy 194. leptocarpa Kost *** Rs in globose capitula; corolla-lobes suberect, involute; filaments pink; n. Colombia to s. Mexico.
195. antioquiensis Killip ex Rudd Key to species of ser. Plurijugae 1.
Capitula oblong or cylindric, the receptacular axis 3-85 mm, commonly over 5 mm long; filaments exserted 3.5-7(-8) mm; Colombia and Venezuela s. to Paraguay and e. Brazil (S. Paulo), but lacking in Amazonia proper.
2.
Lf-formula iv-xxi/17-50; polymorphic and widespread in the regions given above 191.
M. invisa (p. 305).
2.
Lf-formula ii-iv/9-17; local in Venezuela 192.
M. falconis (p. 308).
1.
Capitula globose, the receptacular axis 1-2 mm;filamentsexserted 1.5-3 mm; n. Colombia, interruptedly n.-w. to lowland S. Mexico.
3.
CoroUa-lobes strongly involute; corolla and filaments pink; inflorescence foliate or early becoming so, the peduncles all or mostly subtended by a coeval or immediately hysteranthous If; range as give.
195.
M. antioquiensis (p. 311).
3.
CoroUa-lobes plane or almost so; corolla and filaments white; inflorescence paniculate efoliate.
4.
Lf-formula vii-x/33-40; lfts Unear-oblong, 4.5-6 times as long as wide, the largest 3.5-6 x 0.7- 1.2 mm; corolla ±2 mm; n. Colombia (Sta. Marta) 193.
M. lemniscata (p. 309).
4.
Lf-formula iv-vi/7-12; the lfts oblong-eUiptic 2.2-3 times as long as wide, the largest 7-12 x 2.5-5 mm; corolla ±3 mm; lowland s.-w. Mexico (Colima, Guerrero) 194.
M. leptocarpa (p. 310).
191.
Mimosa invisa Martius ex Colla, Herb, pedem.
2: 255.
1834.—Typus infra sub var. invisa indicatur.
Profusely microphyllidious prickly vines and scrambling (or when lacking support trailing) shrubs 2-5 m (exceptionally dwarfed to 0.5 m), the 5-ribbed or subterete striate, soft-woody intemodes and the ribs of Ift-stks armed with files of recurved aculei to 0.5-2 mm and also minutely reddish-granular, otherwise varying from glabrous to the puberulent peduncles to densely pilosulous or subtomentulose with erect or spreading, sordid or whitish plain hairs to 0.2- 0.5 mm, the thin-textured, when dry fragile lfts dull brown-olivaceous above, either concolorous or paler beneath, always ciliolate but their faces either both glabrous, or both puberulent overall. or the upper alone glabrous, the narrowly oblong or cylindric capitula mostly 2-4 together either in the axil of coevally expanding or of early hysteranthous lvs, then axillary in fmit, or all or partly exserted from foliage in a permanently efoliate pseudoraceme.
Stipules subulate or rarely lanceolate 1.5-5 x 0.2-0.8 mm, 1-nerved, mostly persistent.
Leaf-stalks (2-)4-16 cm, the petiole l-4(-5) cm, at middle (0.5-)0.6-1.6 mm diam., the narrow ventral sulcus either continuous between pairs of pinnae or bridged and then sometimes charged with a smaU subulate spicule, the interpinnal segments 3-16(-20) mm; pinnae (3-)4-21-jug., proximally decrescent but distally subequUong, the rachis of longer ones 1.4-4.5(- 5.5) cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.9 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 17-50-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the smaU first pair 0.4-1.7 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.1- 0.45(-0.7) mm, the blades linear or obscurely linear-oblanceolate from rectangulate or deeply obtusangulate base, obtuse apiculate or deltately acute at apex, the longer ones (1.8-)2-8(-9) x 0.4-1.6(-1.8) mm, 4.5-6 times as long as wide, all veinless above, dorsally l-2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the slender midrib subcentric, immersed but discolored, simple or faintly 1-2- branched on each side, the posterior nerve(s), when present, weak and short.
Peduncles 3-16 mm, ebracteolate; spikes without filaments 3-5.5 mm diam., the axis becoming (5-)8-85 mm, the narrowly obovoid obtuse fl-buds either glabrous or distally puberulent; bracts linear-oblanceolate or -spatulate 0.3-0.8 x 0.1-0.25 mm, mostly deciduous; flowers (4-)5(-6)-merous (4-)5-androus, some lower ones of each spike often staminate, all sessile or almost so; calyx campanulate 0.2-0.6 mm, the very short or obscure teeth often granular-ciliolate; corolla membranous, turbinate or narrowly funnelform 1.3-2.7 mm, the erect lance-ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.7-1.2 x 0.4-0.6 mm, subincurved at apex; filaments pink, free to base, exserted (4-)4.5-7(-8) mm; anthers 0.3-0.5 mm, the connective broadly elliptic in dorsal view.
Pods 1-3 per spike, in profile broadlinear, when well fertilized 7-14.5 X (0.5-) 1-2.2 cm and (7-) 10-18-seeded, tapering at base into a stipe (1-) 1.5-5 mm, abruptly cuspidate at broadly rounded apex, the randomly retro-aculeate replum 0.4-0.8 mm wide, glabrous or thinly puberulent, the papery, pale brown valves plane except for a small discolored coUiculus over each seed, either glabrous but minutely granular or sparsely to densely puberulent overall, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent oblong articles 6-9(-10) mm long; seeds transverse at middle of valves, not seen fully ripe.
The four species of ser. Spiciflorae lacking petiolar nectaries that were known to Bentham in 1876 (p. 407) together with the subsequently described M. brevispica and M. esmeraldae are essentially homogeneous in stmcture of flower and pod, and differ in relatively labile characters of leaf-formula, length of ffower-spikes, and leafiness of the mature infforescence.
These unstable characters vary independently of one another, with the result that Bentham's diagnostic phrases no longer apply to much of the material that has accumulated in the past century.
The group is here treated as one species that shows a degree of racial differentiation in its farffung range.
South of Amazonia the flower-spikes tend to be elongate and the whole inflorescence tends to be exserted from foliage, whereas in Guayana, Venezuela and adjoining Colombia the individual spike is either contracted or relatively few-flowered, and the majority of peduncles are early surpassed by their subtending leaf, the pods consequently immersed in foliage.
I recognize these internally variable assemblages as the geographic subspecies invisa and spiciflora, respectively.
Within each subspecies there is wide variation in leaf-formula, leaf-size and length of flowerspike, in pubescence of stem and pod, and in width of pod, but these features are insecurely correlated or obviously not so.
The visually arresting differences in leaf-formula are rather well linked with dispersal in the range of subsp. invisa, less well in that of subsp. spiciflora, but in both are loosely correlated with length of the floral axis.
In spite of ambiguous individual specimens it seems desirable to maintain two varieties in each subspecies, these corresponding more or less closely with the four species known to Bentham.
1.
Key to subdivisions of M. invisa R-spikes long and narrow, without filaments 3-3.5 mm diam., and the axis of longer ones (2.5-)3-8 cm; inflorescence at anthesis and often permanently exserted or at least distally exserted from foliage; calyx 0.2-0.4 mm; Brazil s.-ward from Ceara to e. S. Paulo; Paraguay; I. subsp. invisa: 2.
Lf-stks 4-8(-9) cm, charged between each of 6-9(-10) pairs of pinnae with a smaU spicule; axis of fl-spikes 2.5-4.5 cm; Brazil n.-ward from Minas Gerais and e.-centr. Goias; Paraguay 191/Ia. var. invisa (p. 307).
2.
Lf-stks 6-14 cm, the rachis continuously grooved between 9-21 pairs of pinnae; axis of fl-spikes 4- 8.5 cm; BrazU s.-ward from centr. Minas Gerais to s.-e. S. Paulo.
.
191/Ib. var. macrostachya (p. 307).
R-spikes either shorter, or a little broader, or both, without filaments (3.5-)4-5.5 mm diam., the axis of longer ones 0.5-3 cm; inflorescence at or immediately after anthesis largely or entirely foliate, the fmits immersed in lvs; calyx (0.4-)0.45-0.6 mm, and corolla (1.8-)2-2.7 mm; n. BrazU (Roraima) and adj. Guyana, n. to Venezuela and n.-e. Colombia; II. subsp. spiciflora: 3.
Lf-stks 7-16 cm, the pinnae 6-12(-16)-jug., the rachis of longer ones 2.5-5.5 cm with 26-37 pairs of lfts; range of the subsp 191/IIa. var. spiciflora (p. 307).
3.
Lf-stks 2-6.5(-7) cm, the pinnae (3-)4-6(-7)-jug., the rachis of longer ones 1.4-3 cm with 17-26 pairs of lfts; local in n.-w. Venezuela (Tachira to Aragua) 191/IIb. var. tovarensis (p. 308).
191/1.
Mimosa invisa Martius ex Colla subsp. invisa.
M. invisa Martius ex Colla, 1834.— Typus infra sub var. invisa indicatur.
Flower-spikes relatively long and narrow, tending to form efoliate exserted pseudo-racemes; flowers relatively small (see key for measurements); dispersal s. of the Amazonian Hylaea.
191/Ia. Mimosa invisa Martius ex Colla subsp. invisa var. invisa.
M. invisa Martius ex Colla, 1834, I.e., sens, str.—"e Brasilia communicata a cl: Martio."
—Holotypus, TO (seen in photograph)!—Non M. invisa MdiXtius, 1837.
Schrankia rhodostachya Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 414.
1842.- "Serra Acuma [Bahia], Blanchet n. 2912; Avacaty [=Aracati, Ceara], Gardner, n. 1587."
— Lectotypus, Blanchet 2912, K (hb. Hook.)!; isotypi, BM! K (hb. Benth.)! = IPA Neg. 1268 = NY Neg. 1838; syntypi, Gardner 1587, BM! K\-Mimosa rhodostachya (Bentham) Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 407.
1875.
Mimosa rhodostachya sensu Bentham, 1876: 343, t. 83, fig. II. M. invisa sensu Bameby, Brittonia 39:49.
1987; Lewis, 1987, fig. 9M. Characters given in key to subdivisions of species.
In disturbed shrub-woodland and at edge of gallery forest, in Bahia and Minas Gerais at 450- 800 m but perhaps lower n.-ward, locally abundant but scattered in Chapada Diamantina and middle S. Francisco valley in Bahia, extending w. just into Goias (Sa. do Morcego), s. to centr. Minas Gerais, and locally n. to n.-e. Ceara; e. Paraguay.—Fl. ll-V. — Calumbi miudo (Bahia).
Map 27.
191/Ib.
Mimosa invisa Martius ex Colla subsp. invisa var. macrostachya (Bentham) Bameby, comb, nov., based on autonym generated by M. macrostachya var. glaberrima Macbride (q.v. sub M. glutinosa Malme).
Schrankia macrostachya Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 414.
1842. —"BrazU, i'o/z/, Sello; Martius, exs. n. 1103."—Lectotypus, Martius 1103, K! = NY Neg. 1839; syntypi, Pohl 1390 [from 'Matthias Ramos' ace.
Bentham, 1876: 344 = Matias Barbosa ace. original label at W!], K! ISTY! Sello s.n.,
YJ.—Mimosa macrostachya (Bentham) Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 13.
1919, hom. poster.; non M. macrostachya Poiret, 1810.—Equated by Bentham, 1875: 407, with M. millefoliata Scheele, q.v. in Append.
I. M. calistachya K. B. Presl, Abh.
Konigl.
Bohm.
Ges.
Wiss.
V, 3: 495.
1845 [Bot. Bemerk.
65.
1844 [1846]].-"Habitat in BrasiUa ad Entrada dos Reyes."
—No typus survives at Praha, the collector's name was not recorded, and the type-locality has not been identified.
The description answers well to M. rhodostachya macrostachya, and Bentham's interpretation ofit, as equivalent to M. millefoliata Scheele sensu Bentham, is accepted.
M. millefoliata sensu Bentham, 1876: 344; non Scheele.
Characters given in key to divisions of species.
In brushy campo and perhaps other habitats, the ecology poorly reported, attaining 1000 m in e. S. Paulo, scattered through upland centr. and s. Minas Gerais, s. to Sas. da Mantiqueira and dos Orgaos in Rio de Janeiro, thence w. to e.- centr. Goias, and through Sa. da Bocaina to Itapetininga in s. S. Paulo; Paraguay (depto. Canendiyu).-n. XII-IV. Map 27.
191/11.
Mimosa invisa Martius ex Colla subsp. spiciflora (Karsten) Bameby, stat. nov. M. spiciflora Karsten, Fl.
Columb.
2: 61, t. 131.
1863.—Typus infra sub var. spiciflora indicatur.
Flower-spikes relatively short or, when as long as those of subsp. invisa, a little thicker, and tending to form a leafy or hysteranthously leafy thyrse; flowers a little longer than those of subsp. rhodostachya (for measurements see key); dispersal n.-ward from n. Brazil and Guyana.
191/IIa.
Mimosa invisa Martius ex Colla subsp. spiciflora (Karsten) Bameby var. spiciflora.
M. spiciflora Karsten, 1863, I.e., sens, str.—"HabMAP 27.
Central and tropical South America.
Ranges of M antioquiensis Rudd M. falconis Bameby, part of M. invisa Martius ex Colla, and M. lemniscata Bameby. itat fruticetis regionum calidamm fertilium Venezuelae prope Caracas et Puerto Cabello."
—Holotypus, Karsten s.n.,
W!; isotypi, BM (no. 77)\ G! Schrankia glabra Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 94.
1846.—"New Granada, Linden, n. 1501."—Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.,
fl + fr jun)! = NY Neg. 1928 (plant atright);isotypi, K (hb. Benth.,
mounted with precedmg, plant at left)! BM! NY! W (the locality there given as 'Campanero, prov. Carabobo')!—Non Mimosa glabra Bentham, 1842.
Mimosa brevispica Harms, Notizbl.
Bot. Gart.
BerlinDahlem 6: 303.
1915.-"Brasilien: Rio Branco, Serra de Carauma (Ule n. 7726-Nov. 1908); Boa Vista (Ule n. 8478)."-Syntypi, +B, one, Ule 7726 = F Neg. 1401 = clastotypus (fragm), F! K! = NY Neg. 1920, RB! M. esmeraldae Britton in Britton & Killip, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 35: 152.
1936.-".. . between Chinacota and La Esmeralda, Norte de Santander, Colombia, March 19, 1927, Killip & Smith 20889.''- Holotypus, NY! = NY Neg. 4991.
M. spiciflora sensu Bentham, 1875: 407; Steyermark & Huber, H. Avila lam. 172D. 1978.
M. brevispica sensu Ducke, 1949: 55.
Characters as given in key to divisions of the species.
Climbing in thickets and hedges or trailing in open rocky places, 100-1350 m, discontinuously dispersed from n. end of Cordillera Oriental in Norte de Santander, Colombia e. across n. Venezuela to estado Monagas; apparently disjunct in upper Branco and Rupununi valleys in n. Roraima, BrazU and adj. Guyana.—Fl.
VIII-II(-?).
Map 27.
The var. spiciflora varies in pubescence and in width of pod.
Most of the known specimens from north-central Venezuela, including the types of M. spiciflora and Schrankia glabra, have glabrous stems; and the pods, if present, are 12-16 mm wide.
The types of M. esmeraldae and M. brevispica have densely pilosulous stems and leafstalks, but so does the one known coUection from the state of Monagas; moreover, Pittier 9775 (NY) from Caracas has the same type of indument but thinner.
The pods coUected along Rio Branco in Brazil are a little wider than any so far known from Venezuela, attaining widths of 15-22 mm.
No differential character other than pubescence was invoked either by Harms or Britton to distinguish M. brevispica and M. esmeraldae from M. spiciflora, all of which have essentially the same leaf-formula, inflorescence, and corolla.
191/IIb.
Mimosa invisa Martius ex Colla subsp. spiciflora (Karsten) var. tovarensis (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. tovarensis Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 407.
1875.— ""Hab.
Tropical America: Venezuela, near the colony of Tovar (Caracas [now estado Aragua]), Fendler, n. 344."-Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = ISTY Neg. 7927; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54870, G! = F Neg. 28234, M! MO! P! Characters as given in key to divisions of the species.
In dry thickets at moderate elevations in the hills of n.-centr. and n.-w. Venezuela (Tachira, Aragua).-H. (?-)IV-V(-?).
This variety appears to differ from var. spiciflora only in the diminished leaf-formula, the individual flower and individual pod remaining unmodified.
The type of M. tovarensis has very short flower-spikes, but Ferrari 1447 (NY) from Tachira, with the same leaves, has spikes 2-3 cm long. The status of var. tovarensis needs observation in the field.
192.
Mimosa falconis Bameby, sp. nov., M. invisae var. tovarensi proxime accedens, sed foliorum formula simplifacta, pinnis 2-4-, foliolisque 9-16(-17)-jugis usque plane diversa.— Venezuela.
Edo.
Falcon, distr.
Bolivar: limestone ridges 2-4 km w. of Carrizalito, 11°08'N, 69°46'W, 19.
X.1985 (fl, fr), H. van der Werflf (with R. Wingfield) 7^66.-Holotypus, MO; isotypi, K, MEXU, NY.
Microphyllidious shrubs attaining ± 1.5 m, the virgate, strongly ribbed stems armed near and between nodes with scattered, erect or subdeclined aculei 0.5-2.5 mm, the stems, lf-stks and peduncles in addition minutely puberulent and livid-granular, the lvs moderately bicolored, the facially glabrous lfts dark-olivaceous above, paler beneath, sometimes minutely ciliolate, the oblong-ovoid capitula all or mostly axillary to coetaneous lvs, the fruits immersed in foliage.
Stipules erect, narrowly triangular-acuminate 2- 3.5 X 0.5-0.9 mm, 1-nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks 1.5-4 cm, the petiole including pulvinus 7-20 mm, at middle 0.5-0.6 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 4-8 mm, the ventral sulcus continuous between pinna-pairs (spicules 0); pinnae 2-4-jug., subaccrescent distally, the rachis of distal pair 9-22 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.5(-2) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 9-16(-17)-jug., the first pair 0.4-1.7 mm distant from lance-ovate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.6 mm, the blades Unear-oblong from shallowly semicordate or obtusangulate base, obtuse or obscurely deltate-acute at apex, the longer ones 4- 6.5(-8) X 1.2-2(-2.4) mm, 3 ^ .3 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath weakly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the scarcely displaced midrib either simple or finely 2-3-branched on each side, the posterior nerve either weak and short or camptodrome near mid-blade, the nerves all immersed but discolored.
Peduncles solitary and fasciculate by 2-4, 7-15 mm; capitula oblong-ovoid, without filaments ±4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds either glabrous or minutely puberulent, the receptacle becoming 3-6 x 0.8-1 mm; bracts oblanceolate 0.5-0.6 mm, deciduous; flowers subdimorphic, the lowest smaller and some of them sometimes 4-merous staminate, the distal ones or sometimes all 5-merous bisexual, all haplostemonous; calyx membranous campanulate 0.4- 0.5 mm, the orifice obscurely crenulate and microscopically granular-ciliolate; corolla of middle and upper fls ±2-2.5 mm, turbinate-campanulate but contracted proximally, the erect lance-ovate acute 1-nerved lobes 0.8-1 x 0.4- 0.6 mm; filaments pink-lilac, free, exserted 3.5- 5 mm; anther-connective longer than wide.
Pods 1-4 per capitulum, sessile or basally attenuate, in profile broad-linear straight or almost so, planocompressed 30-85 x 8-10 mm, 6-10-seeded, the replum 0.4-0.55 mm diam., constricted only where ovules abort, unarmed or charged on seminiferous suture with 1-2 small prickles, the papery, green or brownish-stramineous valves low-colliculate over each seed but otherwise plane, the replum and valves minutely granular and sometimes also minutely puberulent, the valves breaking up into free-falling articles 4.5- 8 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In open scrub-woodland, sometimes on limestone, near 1300 m, known with certainty only from Sa. de S. Luis in state of Falcon and from "Loma de Leon," distr.
Tribarren in state of Lara, Venezuela.-H. IX-XI(-?).
Map 27.
Mimosa falconis has essentiaUy the flowers and fruits of M. invisa var. tovarensis, but differs from M. invisa sens. lat. in notably reduced leaf-formula.
Its ultimate taxonomic status will depend on stability of the formula within populations that conform to a natural pattem of dispersal and on the value attached to these criteria.
193.
Mimosa lemniscata Bameby, sp. nov., M. antioquiensi certe proxima, cum ea flosculis pentameris haplostemoneis necnon legumine lato-lineari congrua, sed inflorescentia paniculata efoliata, calyce minuto (eo formarum M. antioquiensis columbianarum quam duplo minori), coroUae lobulis ovatis fere planis (nec linearibus involutis), filamentisque albis (nec roseis) diversa.—Colombia.
Magdalena: camino de La Gran Via a San Pedro, 14.
XII.1966 (fl cum craspedio submaturo), R. RomeroCastaiieda 706^5.—Holotypus, COL; isotypi, F, MO, NY.
Amply microphyllidious shrub 3 m (very likely soft-woody and sarmentose), armed on prominent ribs of lustrous castaneous stems, on lf-stks, and on branchlets of effuse paniculate inflorescence with files of recurved cat's-claw aculei less than 1 mm and, except for facially glabrous lfts, thinly puberulent and minutely livid-granular, the brown sublustrous concolorous lfts thinly ciliolate, the globose capitula solitary and geminate along efoliate branches of panicle exserted ±2 dm above lvs.
Stipules stiffly erect, linear-lanceolate 2 .
5 ^ X 0.5-0.7 mm, obscurely 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 6-9.5 cm, the petiole ±1.5- 3 cm, at middle 0.5-0.8 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 7-12 mm, the narrow shallow ventral sulcus continuous between pinnapairs (spicules 0); pinnae 7-10-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of distal ones ± 3-5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 33-40-jug., decrescent only near each end of rachis, the first pair 0.4-1.6 mm distant from eUiptic obtuse paraphyllidia 0.3-0.4 mm, the blades Unear-oblong from deeply obtusangulate base, obtuse, those near mid-rachis 3.5-6 X 0.7-1.2 mm, ±4.5-6 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath faintly 1-nerved by the immersed, subcentric midrib.
Peduncles 6-14 mm; capitula without filaments 3 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the clavate receptacle not over 1 mm long; bracts oblanceolate ±1 x 0.3 mm; flowers 5-merous 5-androus glabrous; calyx campanulate 0.3-0.35 mm, the rim obscurely undulate, not granularfimbriolate; corolla vase-shaped ±1.8 mm, the erect, ovate acute, almost plane lobes 0.8 x 0.5 mm; filaments white, free, exserted 3 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, pilosulous after fertilization.
Pods (seen fully formed but not fully ripe) 1-3 per capitulum, broad-linear piano-compressed, straight or irregularly distorted, in profile attaining 8-9 X 1.3-1.5 cm, 10-14-ovulate, at base contracted into a stipe 1-6 mm and at apex into an acicular cusp 2-4.5 mm, the crispundulate replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, the papery, dull fawn-colored valves finely puberulent and livid-granular overall, breaking up into (apparently) free-falling articles 5-6 mm long. In unrecorded habitat, to be expected in bmshwoodland or in hedges at low elevations, known only from the type-station near Sta. Marta in n. Magdalena, Colombia.-H. (?-)XI-XII. Map 27.
At first sight M. lemniscata suggests some form of M. invisa subsp. invisa, with which it agrees in pentamerous haplostemonous flowers and broad ribbon-like (whence the epithet) pods; but it differs in strictly capitellate flowers and white, not pink filaments, less exserted from the corolla.
It is more closely related to the also Colombian M. antioquiensis, but cannot be referred there with comfort, differing in the effuse efoliate panicle of capitula, in calyx less than half as long as sympatric populations of M. antioquiensis, in white (not pinkish-red) corolla with ovate, almost plane (not linear-involute) lobes, and in white (not pink) filaments.
Its leafless panicle of small white capitula recalls M. (ser. Bimucronatae) bimucronata, but the plant is otherwise very different in armament, in stamen-number, and in much longer and wider pod.
194.
Mimosa leptocarpa Rose, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 1: 326.
1895.-"[Mexico.
Colima:] Manzanillo, March 2 to 18, 1891. [E. Palmer] No. 1341."-Holotypus, US!; isotypi, GH! = ISFY Neg. 11984, NYl—Neomimosa leptocarpa (Rose) Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 172.
1928.
M. argillotropha B. L. Robinson, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist. 31: 257.
1904.-"Mexico: in clayey soU at La Correa [=Agua de Correa e. of Zihuatanejo], Guerrero, alt. 50 m, 4 October, 1898, E. Langlasse, n. 415 "-Holotypus, GH! = NY Neg. 11982; isotypi, NY (fragm.)! US! M. leptocarpa sensu B. L. Robinson, 1898: 315; Standley, 1922: 361; McVaugh, 1987: 213.
M. sepiaria sensu M. Micheli, 1903: 279; non Bentham.
M. argillotropha sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 167; Standley, 1922: 363.
Amply leafy, bushy or sarmentose shrubs armed on bluntly 5-ribbed stems and on both dorsal and lateral ribs of If-axes with files of sharp recurved, broad-based aculei ±1-2 mm, minutely strigulose almost throughout with fine appressed or weakly ascending hairs less than 0.2 mm, nowhere glandular nor setose, the lvs bicolored, the thin-textured lfts dull brown-olivaceous above, pale-olivaceous beneath, the inflorescence a pyramidal panicle of small globose capitula exserted 1.5-2.5 mm from foliage.
Stipules erect, suhulate-setiform 1.5-3 X 0.2-0.3 mm, I -nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of larger lvs 6- II cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 1.5- 30 X 0.6-0.9 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 10-18 mm, the narrow ventral sulcus bridged between pinnae but espiculate; pinnae 4-6-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 3-4 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 3-5 mm; lfts of larger pinnae 7-1 l(-12)-jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis, the blades oblong or oblong-elUptic from obliquely subtruncate inequilateral base, abruptly sharply apiculate, the larger ones 7-12 x 2.5-5 mm, 2.2-3 times as long as wide, all essentially veinless above, beneath delicately 2-nerved from pulvinule, the centric, immersed or scarcely prominulous midrib faintly pinnate, the posterior nerve expiring below mid-blade.
Peduncles 2-5 per node of panicle, 10-17 mm; capitula without filaments 6- 6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the clavate obtuse fl-buds glabrous; bracts oblanceolate 0.5-0.7 mm, puberulent; y/ow^r^ 5-merous haplostemonous or some randomly 6-8(-9)-androus, glabrous throughout; corolla described as white, darkening when dry, vase-shaped, 3-3.2 mm, the erect-spreading ovate lobes 0.8-1 x 0.6- 0.7 mm, weakly 1-nerved; filaments free to base, exserted 3-4 mm; ovary puberulent.
Pods solitary or few per capitulum, stipitate, the stipe 6- 14 mm, the body in profile broad-linear, abruptly contracted into stipe, obtuse, 17-13 x 1.3-2.2 cm, piano-compressed, the shallowly undulate replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, the papery, when ripe lustrous brown glabrous valves delicately venulose, minutely umbonulate over each seed, readily separating from replum but rather tardily and irregularly breaking up into ±10-12 freefalling articles a little wider than long; seeds discoid, in broad profile 5-5.5 x 4.5-5 mm, the smooth sublustrous testa brown at margin but paler at pleurogram.
In drought-deciduous matorral below 100 m, scattered along the Pacific lowlands of s.-w. Mexico in Colima and w. Guerrero, seldom collecte d . - H .
X-XII(-?).
Mimosa leptocarpa made two appearances in North American Flora, the flowering state as a monotypic group Argillotrophae, the fruiting state as Neomimosa leptocarpa.
In North America it was morphologically isolated until the recent discovery in Oaxaca of M. antioquiensis, and its connection with the South American species of ser. Plurijugae escaped notice.
Its mostly pentamerous flowers that give rise to broadly ribbonshaped, stipitate and about 10-12-ovulate pods combined with elaborately bipinnate leaves and cat's-claw armament of stems and leaf-stalks are in close agreement with M. antioquiensis and M. lemniscata, from both of which it differs, however, in fewer larger leaflets and isolated habitat along the coastal plain of Colima and Guerrero.
In the limited number of flowers available for dissection I found the androecium for the most part strictly haplostemonous, one to three and exceptionally four complementary stamens appearing randomly in some lower flowers.
195.
Mimosa antioquiensis Killip ex Rudd, Phytologia 33: 235 (''antioquensis"").
1976.—"R.
D. Metcalfe & J. Cuatrecasas 30082, Colombia, Antioquia, banks of rio Cauca at Puerto Valdivia, aU.
240-260 m, 17-20 Feb. 1942."
- Holotypus, US 18333381 = NY Neg. 12185; isotypi, A! MO! M. antioquiensis var. isthmensis R. Grether, Syst. Bot. 15:439,figs.4-6.
1990.—"Mexico, Oaxaca, Distrito de Juquila, Municipio de Tututepec, Cacalote, 32 km al W-NW de Puerto Escondido, aU.
0 m, 21 Oct 1976, Sousa et al. 6^70."-Holotypus, MEXU (not seen).
Amply microphyllidious scandent shrubs attaining 2-8 m, armed on ribs of stout pentagonal or more slender subterete branches and on both dorsal and lateral ribs of If-axes with sharp recurved broad-based aculei 0.5-1.5(-2) mm, subglabrous or finely pilosulous on stem-ribs and puberulent on lf-stks and peduncles with simple hairs to ±0.2-0.4 mm, randomly granular but nowhere glandular, the lvs concolorous, the thintextured brown-olivaceous lfts glabrous facially, minutely subappressed-ciliolate all around or only toward base, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula mostly axillary to ample coeval lvs and surpassed by them, or some axillary to smaller, or hysteranthous lvs and forming a short pseudoraceme in early anthesis, but this foliate in fruit.
Stipules erect, Unear-attenuate or setiform 1-6 X 0.2-0.4 mm, either 1-nerved or convex and not evidently nerved dorsally, becoming dry and fragile, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 7-20 cm, the petiole including pulvinus 15-40 x 0.5- 1.4 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-13 mm, the narrow ventral sulcus either continuous or weakly bridged between pinnae but espiculate; pinnae (7-)8-l6-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 2.5-5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (0.5-)0.6-l .4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 24—44-jug., the first pair 0.7-1.8 mm distant from ascending subulate paraphyllidia 0.2- 0.8 mm, the blades linear or narrowly oblong from obtusangulate base, obtuse or deltately subacute, straight or subfalcate, the longer ones 3- 6(-7) X 0.5-1.3 mm, 3.8-7(-8) times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath weakly 1-3- nerved from pulvinule, the simple, immersed but discolored or subprominulous midrib centric at least beyond mid-blade, the posterior nerve(s), if present, short or obscure.
Peduncles either solitary or several per node, 10-14 mm, in fruit 0.8-1.5 mm diam., the receptacle ±2 mm; capitula without filaments 5-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the clavate obtuse fl-buds glabrous; bracts linear or linear-spatulate 0.5-0.9 mm, granular-fimbriolate; flowers 5-merous 5-androus, all or most bisexual; calyx shallowly or narrowly campanulate ±0.4-1 x 0.5-0.6 mm, glabrous extemally, the obscurely crenulate-denticulate rim granular-fimbriolate; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 1.9-2.7 mm, glabrous, the nearly erect, linear-involute and apically hooded lobes 0.6-0.9 x 0.2-0.4 mm; filaments united below ovary through ±0.2-0.3 mm, exserted 1.5- 2 mm.
Pods 1-several per capitulum, stipitate, the stout stipe (1.5-)3-15 mm, the broad-linear, almost straight, piano-compressed body (40-)45- 130 X (6-)7-13 mm, (6-)8-20-seeded, the shallowly undulate replum 0.4-1.1 mm wide, the papery, brown or at length atrocastaneous venulose, minutely granular, otherwise either glabrous or finely puberulent valves low-convex over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling indehiscent articles 4.5-9 mm long; seeds (few seen) transverse, oblong-obovate in broad view, ±6 X 3.6 mm, the brown testa smooth.
Climbing into trees in pluvial forest, scrambling through and over riparian shrubbery, and in disturbed brush-woodland ±200-690 m, discontinuously dispersed from s. Mexico (Pacific slope of Isthmus of Tehuantepec) to El Salvador, and about the north end of Cordillera Central drained by rios Cauca and Nechi in n. Antioquia, Colombia; to be sought elsewhere in Central America and n. Colombia.—Fl. (?-)I-III(-?).
Map 27.
The discovery of M. antioquiensis introduced the new dimension of globose flowerheads into a series until that time defined by amentiform flower-spikes.
The capitula of M. antioquiensis can be visualized as the terminus in a progressive shortening of the floral axis that starts with (or perhaps more accurately culminates in) the long loose spikes of M. invisa subsp. invisa south of Amazonia and passes through ever shorter and denser stages in M. invisa subsp. spiciflora of northem South America.
This sequence, whichever way it may be read, is nearly continuous; but M. antioquiensis and M. lemniscata are distinguished collectively from the M. invisa complex by short filaments correlated with spherical flower-heads, andM. antioquiensis from all other Plurijugae by its involute and therefore apparently very narrow corolla-lobes.
Mimosa antioquiensis is an at least superficially variable species, of which I have seen few complete specimens, these moreover from widely separated localities.
It may prove divisible into geographic varieties, one centered in the lower Magdalena valley in Colombia, and the other on the Pacific slope in southern Mexico and El Salvador.
The typical form has a deeply campanulate calyx (± 1 mm) and craspedia about 90- 130 X 11-13 mm, whereas the calyx in Central America is only half as long or less and the body of the craspedium is 45-90 x 7-12 mm, composed of correspondingly fewer (8-15, not 12- 20) articles.
My colleague R. Grether informs me that there are distinct pubescence forms of M. antioquiensis in Oaxaca correlated with microhabitat, and that occasional tetramerous and hexamerous flowers have been observed there.
I leave the solution of taxonomic problems in M. antioquiensis to Dra.
Grether, who has opportunities for field-study and access to fuller material.
The foregoing description attempts to portray the range of variation directly observed in the course of this study.
The epithet antioquiensis was so written on the type-sheet by Dr. Rudd herself, but was published as antioquensis.
I here adopt as a preferable orthographic variant what is certainly the etymologically correct and presumably the intended spelling.
C. Sectio C A L O T H A M N O S Bameby Mimosa sect. Calothamnos Bameby, nom. et stat. nov. M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Lepidotae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hook.) 4: 386.
1841.-Sp. lectotypica: M. calothamnos Bentham = M. aurivillus var. calothamnos (Bentham) Bameby.
M. ser.Lepidotaestnsn^tntham, 1875:409-411,1876: 348-354,fig.87; Burkart, 1964: 343^27, figs. 1-11, lam. I-IV (exclus.
M. lanuginosa), revisio systematica; 1979: 162-185, est. 23-29, maps (Sta. Catarina); Lins, 1984: 3-58, figs. 1-8, maps (Rio Grande do Sul).
Trees, taUer erect and small procumbent shrubs, and campestrian subshrubs at maturity woody at least at base, either micro-or macrophyllidious, never armed.
Indumentum of erect setae all or mostly arborescently or stellately branched (throughout or proximally), when stellate and the secondary axes very short appearing scalelike or verruciform, these trichomes varying from pallid to yellowish or rusty-sordid, the corolla sometimes partly or wholly strigulose-puberulent with simple trichomes, these sometimes retrorse, the pod exceptionally with a few gland-tipped setulae mixed with plumose or stelliform setae.
Stipules deltate, triangular-subulate, linear or subsetiform and either dorsally 1-nerved or nerveless, exceptionally (M. peduncularis) ovate 2-4- nerved.
Leaf-formula i-ix(-xiv)/5-32(-37); interpinnal spicules 0; paraphylUdia usually subulate-setiform, rarely ovate, sometimes vestigial orO;lftsattaining(1.5-)2-36 x 0.6-11 mm,dorsally 1-5-nerved.
Inflorescence of either ^ohose to ellipsoid capitula or of ± elongate spikes, exceptionally (M. involucrata) of hemispherical capitula involucrate by imbricate bracts and conelike prior to anthesis, all usually axillary to coeval or immediately hysteranthous lvs, a few rarely pseudoracemose but only at anthesis; flowers functionally haplostemonous, commonly all 4-merous homomorphic, but some lower ones not seldom smaller and staminate, and occasionally some at apex of receptacle larger and 5-merous; calyx either campanulate short-toothed or often reduced to a shallow truncate cup or collar wider than high, the rim ciliolate or not; bisexual corollas (1.2-)1.5-5(-5.2) mm, usually stellate either overall or on lobes only, sometimes merely puberulent; filaments most commonly sulfur-yellow or ochroleucous, in 3 spp. lilacpink fading whitish (the color not demonstrated by dried specimens), at base either free or monadelphous into a membranous cup, the sinuses between fertile filaments sometimes bearing vestigial staminodia; style filiform or (M. berroi) dilated at apex; ovules (1-)2-6(-8), exceptionally (M. berroi) to 12.
Pods 1-10 per capitulum, rarely more numerous but not forming an incompressible ball, in profile narrowly oblong or Unear, or when 1-seeded ovate-elliptic, the replum 0.4-1 mm wide, the valves either scabrous-stellate, or arborescently setose, or floccose-tomentose, the cavity continuous or narrowly membranous-septate between seeds; dehiscence craspedial, the articles individually dehiscent, the valves in M. berroi separating in one piece from replum.
Spp. 26, of planaltine and extratropical Brazil s.-ward from centr. Goias and s.-centr. Bahia, Uruguay, n.-e. Argentina s.-ward to shortly beyond 38°S in prov, Buenos Aires, and s.-e. Paraguay, 1 extending n.-w. into BoUvia; most diverse and numerous in Sa. do Espinha90 in Minas Gerais and in upland campo and cloud-woodland of extratropical Brazil.
As first formulated by Bentham in 1841, Mimosa ser. Lepidotae, the immediate parent of sect. Calothamnos, accommodated fourteen unarmed, shrubby or arboreous mimosas thought to differ collectively from other haplostemonous species in an indumentum of stellately or plumosely branched setae.
Although Bentham was unaware of the fact, aU but one (M. incana) of these fourteen had either yellow or ochroleucous filaments.
But apart from the prevalently yellowish flowers and the consistently stellate-plumose pubescence the group is morphologically quite diverse in form of inflorescence, in leaf-formula, and particularly in the androecium, the filaments being free in some, basally monadelphous in others, and when monadelphous, as first noted in Burkart's meticulous revision of the series (1964), sometimes alternating with vestiges of staminodia.
In fact three of the most significant evolutionary sequences postulated for the Mimosoideae as a whole are recapitulated within contemporary members of this one, ecologically and geographically coherent series: a) simplification of leaves from multijugate to conjugate pinnae; b) reduction of the flower-spike to a globose capitulum by progressive shortening of the floral receptacle; and c) progression from diploto haplostemony by suppression of the antepetalous set of stamens, which are represented in some species of the group by vestigial staminodes.
In his final summary of Lepidotae Bentham (1875) did not materially expand the original definition of the series, although he remarked that branched setae, once thought to be found in this group alone, occurred also in some diplostemonous Leptostachyae (=Leiocarpae of this account).
Setae of this type are in reality of quite wide occurrence in the genus, now known in some diplostemonous Bipinnatae, in one anomalous member of diplostemonous Stipellares, in members of haplostemonous ser. Polycephalae, Brevipedes, and (few) Axillares, and were available to Bentham, although apparently overlooked by him, in haplostemonous M. boliviana.
In each of these cases the plumose seta has been derived from scaberulous setae through emphasis of the secondary cellular outgrowth, a process that must have occurred independently several times in this genus.
On the other hand a genuinely stellate seta, such as are found on flowers of many (but not all) Calothamnos, recurs outside the series only in a few Leiocarpae related to M. schomburgkii and M. verrucosa.
The stellate seta is clearly derived from the plumose one by shortening of the primary axis and elimination of all but a few of its branches.
The so-called lepidote seta is nothing else than a Stella with short rays incipiently fused at base.
The present account of sect. Calothamnos amounts to little more than a gloss on Burkart's monograph, one found necessary, however, in the course of naming the many additional specimens collected, especially in Sa. do Espinha90 and in Parana, by Irwin, Anderson, Hatschbach and others.
I have further the advantage of Burkart's treatment of Lepidotae for Flora ilustrada catarinense, and that of Lins (1984) for the state of Rio Grande do Sul. The reader is referred to these detailed treatises for background material.
I propose to comment here only on my slightly modified redefinition of the series, on its possible phylogenetic relationships in the genus, and on its elevation to sectional status.
The definition of sect. Calothamnos proposed herein is drawn so as to exclude M. lanuginosa and M. diversipila, referred to it by Burkart.
These species have, or can have, plumose indumentum, to be sure, but the plants are virgate campo subshrubs with mostly simple, densely foliate stems going out into a long efoliate pseudoraceme of capitula, thus habitally at variance with all other Lepidotae.
In discussion of these species Burkart (1964: 379, 2>^0)admittedthatporafinidadnatural they belong in Eumimosa ser. Meticulosae (±equivalent of subser. Dolentes and Polycephalae combined) and noted that M. lanuginosa showed close affinity with M. imbricata (M. radula var. imbricata of this account) not only in habit and ecology, but also in paleaceous calyx (unknown in other Lepidotae) and in connate filaments.
Several races of M. radula sensu lato have scabrous setae foreshadowing the plumose ones of M. lanuginosa, which surely belongs in this circle ofaffinity, along with the also plumosesetose M. thermarum described in these pages.
Mimosa diversipila, while agreeing with M. lanuginosa in its virgate campestrian life-form, has the calyx reduced to a minute rim, in form compatible with sect. Calothamnos; but its plumose indumentum is inconstant, passing in the var. subglabriseta into a state similar to that seen in M. radula.
In everything but the inconstant plumose setae M. diversipila closely agrees with sect. Mimosa subser. Brevipedes, a group, highly differentiated in campos of Paraguay and adjoining Brazil, which in its entirety lies far distant from the nucleus of sect. Calothamnos.
Misplaced in sect. Calothamnos, these species appear to forge a link, but a false one, between the advanced unijugate Calothamnos with pink filaments (M. incana, M. flocculosa), whose relationship to shrubby and arborescent plurijugate Calothamnos with yellowish filaments such as M. scabrella is not in question, and the mass of unijugate eumimosae.
It seems likely that the postulated affinity between sect. Calothamnos and a few specialized species of sect. Mimosa subser. Polyindependently of sect. Mimosa, it is properly excephalae is indeed based on no more than coneluded from the latter.
In sect. Batocaulon it vergence in the one character of plumose induwould, however, be anomalous by reason of hapmentum.
If so, Calothamnos stands isolated in lostemonous flowers.
For these reasons it is here sect. Mimosa, to which Bentham referred the accorded independent sectional rank, species because of their simplified androecium.
The species of sect. Calothamnos are arranged.
But survival in some ostensibly primitive Caloso far as linear sequence permits, in order of //z<3m«c>5 of a rudimentary inner set of filaments progressive specialization: plurijugate precede suggests that the real origin of the series lies close conjugate pinnae; spikes precede capitula; monto the diplostemonous L^zocarp^^ that have steladelphous stamens precede free ones, and anlate flowers.
Except for number of fertile stadroecia with staminodes those without; an erect mens, the general congruence between such spibushy or treelike life-form precedes the decate Calothamnos as M. furfuracea or M. pressed stature of M. rocae or M. lepidorepens; cylindracea andM. (Leiocarpae) schomburgkii or and yellowish or yellow filaments precede pink.
M. verrucosa is very close, and reflects, I surmise.
The daisy-like capitulum of M. involucrata is an immediate common origin.
If sect. Calothambeyond dispute climactically modified. nos arose from spicate diplostemonous ancestry Conspectus of sect. Calothamnos Mimosa * Pinnae 2-6-jug.; filaments yellow, basally monadelphous; fls spicate; planaltine Brazil.
196. cylindracea ^Qnthdim 196bis. myuros Bameby 197. furfuracea Bentham 198. barretoi Hoehne ** Pinnae 2-9-jug.; filaments yellow or ochroleucous, at least shortly monadelphous; fls crowded into globose or ellipsoid capitula. t Spp. of tropical dispersal (upland Bahia and centr. Goias s. to Rio de Janeiro and e. S. Paulo.
199. awrm7/w5'Martius ex Bentham a. var. aurivillus b. var. sordescens Bentham c. var. warmingii Bameby d. var. calothamnoides Bameby e. var. calothamnos (Bentham) Bameby 200. peduncularis Bongard ex Bentham 201. leprosa (Bentham) Macbr. a. var. leprosa b. var. parviceps Bameby 202. calodendron Martius ex Bentham 203. macedoana Burkart a. var. macedoana b. var. glabrescens (Burkart) Bameby 204. chrysastra Martius a. var. chrysastra b. var. itambeana Bameby ft Spp. entirely or in the case ofM scabrella primarily of extratropical dispersal, the latter entering s. Minas Gerais and also extensively cultivated in Old and New World tropics.
205. scabrella Bentham 206. eriocarpa Bentham 207. taimbensis Burkart 208. lepidorepens Burkart 209. bathyrrhena Bameby ttt Extratropical and riparian; seeds buoyant by means of air-pockets in the endosperm; n.-e. Argentina and Umguay.
210. bonplandii (Hooker & Amott) Bentham *** Pinnae 1-jug.; filaments yellowish, monadelphous; fls capitate; extratropical (Parana).
211. urticaria Bameby **** Pinnae 1-jug.; fUaments yellowish monadelphous; fls spicate; s.-e. Brazil to Paraguay and Bolivia.
212. daleoides Bentham ***** Pinnae 1-jug.; filaments yellowish free to base; capitula globose or eUipsoid; style filiform; fruit a craspedium; e. Brazil to n.-e. Argentina.
213. pilulifera Bentham a. var. pilulifera b. var. pseudincana (Burkart) Bameby 214. psittacina Bameby 215. rocae Lorentz & Niederlein ****** Pinnae 1 -jug.; filaments yellowish free; capitula globose; style capitately enlarged; fmit valvately dehiscent; Uruguay and Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
216. berroi Burkart ******* Pinnae 1-jug.; capitula globose or oblong-ellipsoid; filaments free, shortly monadelphous, pink; fmit a craspedium; extratropical Brazil and Paraguay.
217. mcawfl (Sprengel) Bentham 218. flocculosa Burkart 219. plumosa M. Micheli ******** Pinnae 1-jug.; capitula hemispherical bracteate-involucrate; filaments free, pink; fruit a craspedium; e. Brazil, largely or perhaps wholly extratropical.
220. involucrata Bentham Key to species of sect. Calothamnos I. Pinnae of all lvs or at least of some larger ones 2-9-jug. 2.
Rs unequivocally spicate, the receptacle of longer spikes over 11 mm long and the spikes themselves without filaments at once 3-8.5 mm diam. and more than twice as long (if any doubt, take either choice).
3.
Lfts variable in number (6-37-jug.) but none over 12 x 5.5 mm; fl-spikes without filaments 3- 6.5 mm diam.; widespread.
4.
Petiole proper 15-40 mm; lfts (11-) 12-27(-37)-jug. in distal or median pinnae, usually stellate on both faces; stipules 3-8(-10) mm.
5.
Faces of lfts pubescent with subsessile stellae; fl-spikes 25-45 x 3-5 mm, 5-10 times as long as diam.; bracts less than 2 mm, persistent; calyx 0.3-0.5 mm; pinnae of longer lvs (2-)3-9-jug.; lfts of longer pinnae 16-27(-37)-jug and the larger ones 1.5-2.8 mm wide.
6.
Fls 2.1-2.5 mm long, the perianth tetramerous, the spikes without filaments 4.5-5 mm diam.; of cerrado below 1100 m, relatively widespread 196.
M. cylindracea (p. 319).
6.
Fls scarcely 1.3 mm long, the perianth pentamerous, the spikes without filaments ±3 mm diam.; of Sa. da Mantiqueira, at ±1600 m, near s. border of Minas Gerais 196bis.
M. myuros (p. 320).
5.
Faces of lfts pubescent with stalked stellae or incipiently plumose setulae to 0.15-0.3 mm taU; fl-spikes mostly 10-30 x 5.5-6.5 mm, 2-5 times as long as diam.; bracts 2-3 mm, deciduous; calyx 0.1-0.25 mm; pinnae of longer lvs 2-4-jug.; lfts of distal pinnae 11- 18(-19)-jug. and the larger ones 2.5-4.8 mm wide 197.
M. furfuracea (p. 320).
4.
Petiole proper 5-12 mm; lfts on upper face lustrous, glabrous or almost so.
7.
Stipules less than 2 mm; lfts 6-1 l(-12)-jug., the longer ones 5.5-12 mm; Minas Gerais to n.-e. S. Paulo; spicate forms of: 199.
M. aurivillus (p. 322).
7.
Stipules 1.5-4.5 mm; lfts 11-17-jug., the longer ones 3^.5 mm; s.-e. Sta. Catarina and n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul 207.
M. taimbensis (p. 333).
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 5-9(-10)-jug. and the larger ones 13-20 x 6.5-9.5 mm; fl-spikes without filaments 7-8.5 mm diam.; Sa. do Cipo, centr. Minas Gerais 198.
M. barretoi (p. 321).
2.
Fls capitellate, the receptacle 3-11 (-12) mm long, the capitula without filaments globose, ovoid, ovoid-oblong, or plumply ellipsoid, usually less than twice as long as diam., if twice as long then only 3 mm diam. 8.
Plants of tropical e. BrazU, from upland Bahia to S. Paulo, very highly diversified in upland Minas Gerais and Sa. da Mantiqueira.
9.
Setae of stems castaneous glabrous; n.-centr. Minas Gerais 200.
M. peduncularis (p. 326).
9.
Setae of stems either plumose or contracted into stellae, none simple.
10.
Lfts at once small, many, and nearly glabrous, those of longer pinnae 17-21-jug. and not more than 2-2.6 mm long; Pico de Itambe in centr. Minas Gerais; var. itambeana of: 204.
M. chrysastra (p. 330).
10.
Lfts always larger, the longer ones 5 mm or more, and if as numerous as the preceding gray-stellate on both faces; present in centr. Minas Gerais but not known from Pico de Itambe.
11.
Longer lf-stks over 3 cm and proper petiole of most lvs 1.5-4 cm.
12.
Lfts of longer pinnae 15-32-jug.; calyx 0.4-0.8 mm deep; trees 5-20 m, primarily of the Sa. do Mar s. of the Tropic of Capricorn extending n. into extreme s. Minas Gerais, and cultivated elsewhere (in neoand paleotropics alike); pods scabrous-setulose 205.
M. scabrella (p. 331).
12.
Lfts of longer pinnae mostly 11-18-jug.; calyx 0.1-0.3 mm deep; shrubs to 3 m. 13.
Corolla-tube glabrate or simply retrostrigulose, only the lobes steUate.
14.
Stipules 1-1.5 mm, persistent; foliage bicolored, the lfts glabrous dull above, sordidly grayor brownish-stellate beneath; lf-stks not over 3.5 cm or petiole over 2 cm; pod stellately lepidote-tomentulose; centr. Minas Gerais 201.
M. leprosa (p. 327).
14.
Stipules 4-6(-?) mm, deciduous; foliage olivaceous subconcolorous, the lfts SteUate on both faces; lf-stks (3-)4-7 cm and petiole 2-4 cm; pod comose with pliant plumose setae ± 5 mm; e. Parana, but to be sought immediately n. of the Tropic of Capricorn in that state or in adj. S. Paulo 209.
M. bathyrrhena (p. 334).
13.
Corolla-tube stellate-tomentulose from base upward; vars. of: 199.
M. aurivillus (p. 322).
11.
Longer lf-stks (0.7-)l-3 cm and most petioles less than 1.5 cm.
15.
Lfts stellate on upper face; vars. of: 199.
M. aurivillus (p. 322).
15.
Lfts glabrous on upper face.
16.
Lower face of lfts at early maturity or permanently very densely whiteor gray-stellate, the indumentum concealing the epidermis (rarely deciduous in age).
17.
Lfts highly lustrous on upper face; capitula without filaments ellipsoid or oblong-ellipsoid ll-19(-25) x 5-6.5 mm; calyx 0.4-0.8 mm deep; corolla densely stellate-tomentulose overall; lvs crowded toward tip of defoliate trunks 202.
M. calodendron (p. 328).
17.
Lfts dull on upper face; capitula without filaments either shorter or more slender or both, 4-11 x 3-5 mm; calyx 0.2-0.3 mm deep; corolla glabrate or thinly strigulose proximally, stellate only on lobes; lvs spaced along extended homotinous branchlets 201.
M. leprosa (p. 327).
16.
Lfts thinly stellate on lower face, the stellae discrete.
18.
Stellae of dorsal face of lfts sessile; lfts dorsally 3-5-nerved from pulvinule; local in centr. Minas Gerais (s.-w. of Diamantina and Sa. do Cip6) 203.
M. macedoana (p. 329).
18.
Stellae of dorsal face of lfts shortly but distinctly stalked; lfts dorsally 2-nerved from pulvinule; local in Sa. do Espinhafo of centr. and n.- centr. Minas Gerais; vars. of: 199.
M. aurivillus (p. 322).
8.
Plants of extratropical Brazil, Uruguay, and n.-e. Argentina.
19.
Larger lfts ±3.5-6 mm wide; pods ±1.5-3 cm long, several-seeded, the valves concealed by a fleece of slender plumose setae to ±5 mm; near 1000 m in e.-centr. Parana 209.
M. bathyrrhena (p. 334).
19.
Larger lfts less than 3 mm wide; pods either scabrous-setulose, or gray-stellate, or if concealed in fleece less than 1 cm long and 1 -seeded.
20.
Small procumbent, adventitiously rooting shrublets of extreme n.-e. Sta. Catarina. ... 208.
M. lepidorepens (p. 334).
20.
Erect shrubs and trees.
21.
Fls in small amentiform spikes ± twice as long as wide; lfts strongly bicolored, lustrous (either glabrous or thinly stellate) above, paUidly stellate-tomentulose beneath; cloud-woodland of s.-e. Sta. Catarina and n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul 207.
M. taimbensis (p. 333).
21.
Fls in globose or subglobose capitula; lfts not or scarcely bicolored.
22.
Riparian shmbs confined to immediate banks of lower Umguai and Parana rivers and the shores of the Parana estuary and Mar de Plata in Argentina, Umguay, and perhaps adj. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil; seeds buoyant from airpockets in the endosperm 210.
M. bonplandii (p. 335).
22.
Trees and shmbs of upland campo and cloud-forest in e. Brazil n.-ward from centr. Rio Grande do Sul; seeds solid.
23.
Shrubs 2-3 m, local in centr. and n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul; capitula without filaments ±4 mm diam.; of less than 20 fls, and subtended by several small, loosely imbricated bracts empty of fls; pods less than 1 cm long, densely enveloped in a fleece of plumose setae, 1 -seeded 206.
M. eriocarpa (p. 333).
23.
Trees ±5-20 m, gregarious (as bracaatingal) in the zone of Araucaria woodlands along the Atlantic highlands of s. Brazil n.-ward from Rio Grande do Sul, and far dispersed in cultivation; capitula without filaments mostly 5-8 mm diam.; pods ± 15^0 mm, 2-6-seeded, the valves scabroussetulose, -vermculose, or stellate 205.
M. scabrella (p. 331).
1.
Pinnae of all lvs exactly 1-jug. 24.
Fls in cylindric or narrowly ovoid heads, without filaments 3-4.5 mm diam., the receptacular axis 5-16(-25) mm long; widespread in extratropical (in S. Paulo barely into tropical) Brazil, extending w. into n.-e. Argentina and n.-w. through Paraguay into e. Bolivia; filaments monadelphous at base; pods only 2-3 mm wide 212.
M. daleoides (p. 338).
24.
Fls mostly capitate, if spicate the spikes much wider, the pod broader, and the dispersal different.
25.
Spp. of Sa. do Espinha90 and Sa. da Mantiqueira in Minas Gerais and Rio de Janeiro.
26.
Fls in massive spikes, these without filaments 15-30 x 7-8.5 mm; local on Sa. do Cip6 in centr. Minas Gerais; unijugate form of: 198.
M. barretoi (p. 321).
26.
Fls in globose or plumply ovoid capitula.
27.
Filaments basally monadelphous into a cup.
28.
Lfts (10-)12-22-jug. and the larger ones only 2.5-6 x 1.3-2.3 mm, when fully expanded glabrous; capitula without filaments 2.5-3 mm diam.; Pico de Itambe, centr. Minas Gerais; var. chrysastra of: 204.
M. chrysastra (p. 330).
28.
Lfts either fewer, or larger, or both, much larger if glabrate facially.
29.
Lfts conspicuously bicolored, above lustrous dark, on lower face pallid-tomentulose; leaves crowded at ends of branchlets; capitula without filaments 4.5-6.5 mm diam.; 1-jugate form of: 202.
M. calodendron (p. 328).
29.
Lfts either subconcolorous or, ifbicolored, the upper face dull; lvs on extended homotinous branchlets; capitula without filaments 3—4.5 mm diam. 30.
Plants of Sa. do Cipo; lfts thinly stellate and prominently 3-4-nerved beneath; corolla stellate overall; 1-jugate form of: 203.
M. macedoana (p. 329).
30.
Plants of Sa. da Cara9a; lfts densely grayor msty-tomentulose beneath; corolla stellate only above middle; var. parviceps of: 201.
M. leprosa (p. 327).
27.
Filaments free to base.
31.
Capitula globose, without filaments 2-4 mm diam.; corolla stellate overall; lfts densely stellate-tomentulose beneath, 1 - or faintly 2-nerved; centr. Minas Gerais s.-ward, common; var. pseudincana of: 213.
M. pilulifera (p. 339).
31.
Capitula ellipsoid, without filaments 5-6.5 x 3 mm; corolla stellate on lobes, but retrostrigulose proximally; lfts glabrescent beneath, 3(-4)-nerved; local in Sa. da Mantiqueira, far s. Minas Gerais 214.
M. psittacina (p. 341).
25.
Spp. of extratropical BrazU, Umguay, n.-e. Argentina, and 2 in s. Paraguay and closely adj. Brazil.
32.
Filaments at once ochroleucous and free to base.
33.
Lfts relatively large, to 9.5-14.5 x 2.6-4 mm; centr. Parana 211.
M. urticaria (p. 336).
33.
Lfts smaU, the largest 1.5-8(-ll) x 0.6-2.5 mm, in Parana not over 6 x 1.8 mm.
34.
Small prostrate subradicant shmbs; Umguay and Argentina (prov. Buenos Aires).
215.
M rocae (p. 342).
34.
Erect shmbs and treelets.
35.
Style filiform; fmit a craspedium, the valves appressed-lepidote-stellate; widespread 213.
M. pilulifera (p. 339).
35.
Style dilated at tip into a capitate stigma; pod-valves separating from replum in one piece, coarsely densely hispid-setose; local in Uruguay and s.-e. Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU 216.
M. berroi (p. 343).
32.
Filaments at once pink and monadelphous at base.
36.
Capitula prior to anthesis moriform and at anthesis never involucrate by ranks of imbricate bracts; erect shmbs or subshrubs.
37.
Capitula subglobose, without filaments 5-7 mm diam.; lfts 12-30-jug., the largest 3-16 mm; calyx 0.4-0.9 mm.
36.
38.
Stipules 3-6 x 0.3-0.8 mm; lf-stks slender, 0.3-0.6 mm diam.; larger lfts 3- 8(-ll) mm, 1-nerved, the midrib subcentric; pod hispid overaU with subcontiguous, glabrous or basally pubemlent setae; widespread over Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU and s. into Paraguay 217.
M. incana (p. 343).
38.
Stipules 4-12 x 0.7-1.5 mm; lf-stks coarser, 0.5-1.2 mm diam.; larger lfts 7-16 mm, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2 and accompanied by a posterior nerve; pod hispid-tomentulose overall with setae arborescently plumulose from base to tip; extratropical Paraguay, extreme s. Mato Grosso do Sul, and far w. Parana 218.
M. flocculosa (p. 344).
37.
Capitula oblong-ellipsoid, without filaments 9-13 mm diam.; lfts of longer pinnae 9-13-jug., the largest ±7-36 mm; calyx 0.2-0.3 mm; local in mid-w. Paraguay.
219.
M. plumosa (p. 345).
Capitula prior to anthesis conelike, at anthesis subtended by 3>-^ ranks of imbricate pallid bracts, resembling the involucre of the Compositae; small prostrate shrubs of upland campo in e. extratropical Brazil (questionably extending n. along Sa. do Mar to Rio de Janeiro) 220.
M. involucrata (p. 346).
196.
Mimosa cylindracea Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 389.
1841.-"BrazU, Pohr\ the data expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 354.
1876 to: "Bordo do Campo," the habitat mistaken for the locality, this, according to duplicate labels at NY, W, being Concei^ao, Goias, where Pohl collected in IX. 1819.— Holotypus, Pohl 1395, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1852; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1312, F! NY! US (numbered 261)\ W! M. cylindracea sensu Bentham, 1875: 411, 1876: 354, exclus. pi. bahiens.; Burkart, 1964: 375.
Slender arborescent shrubs attaining ± 3 m, the relatively long, amply foliate hornotinous branches, If-axes and peduncles densely tomentulose or in part lepidote with densely plumose brownish setulae to 0.2-0.8 mm or with contracted stelliform scales, the foliage moderately bicolored, the lfts brown-olivaceous above, paler beneath, subequally stellate on both faces, sordid-grayish, the narrow amentiform fl-spikes solitary or usually 2-4 together, the early ones axillary and immersed in foliage, the later ones often forming a shortly exserted panicle.
Stipules firm, lance-linear or -elliptic 3-7 x 0.5-0.5 mm, pubescent dorsally like stem, persistent.
Leafstalks (2-)4-7(-8) cm, the shallowly grooved petiole (1-)2-3.5 cm, at middle 0.65-0.9 mm diam., the interpinnal segments (3-)4.5-14 mm; pinnae of most lvs 3-6-, according to Burkart to 9-, of some distal lvs only 2-jug., little or not accrescent distally, the axis of longer ones 3-5(-5.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 16-27-jug., the first pair 0.5-2 mm distant from subulate, elliptic or sometimes dilated and microphyllidious paraphyllidia 0.5-1.5 mm, the plane blades oblong or oblong-elUptic obtuse from semicordate base, the larger ones 4.5-6.5 X 1.5-2.8 mm, 2.3-3 times as long as wide, all faintly 1 (-2)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2-2.5, the posterior nerve short or obsolete.
Peduncles mostly 12-30 mm; flower-spikes without filaments (22-)25-45 X 4.5-5 mm, ±5-9 times as long as diam.; bracts linear or oblanceolate 0.67- 1.2 mm, tomentulose distally, persistent;^Zovv^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx membranous brown, shallowly campanulate 0.3- 0.5 mm, glabrous extemally; corolla plumply obovoid-ellipsoid camosulous 2.1-2.5 mm, densely pallid-tomentulose extemally, the concave ovate lobes 0.8-1.1 x 0.65-0.9 mm; filaments sulphur-yellow, at base either free or monadelphous through 0.5 mm, exserted 2.4—4 mm, staminodia 0.
Pods (fev^ seen) ±10-19 x 5 mm, the replum and valves densely shortly stellatelepidote overall, the dehiscence craspedial; ripe seeds unknown.
At thicket-margins and in brejo within cerrado climax, ±400-1050 m, apparently rare and scattered over the Brazilian Planalto from centr. Goias and Distrito Federal to s.-w. and centr. Minas Gerais and e. S. Paulo.—Fl.
IX-V. As Burkart has remarked, M. cylindracea resembles M. scabrella in aspect of foliage and its gray indumentum, while very different in the spicate inflorescence.
It is somewhat precariously distinguished from M. furfuracea by more appressed vesture of stelliform setae, by narrower spikes, persistent bracts, slightly larger calyx, and on the average more numerous and smaller leaflets.
The known ranges of the two species are far from coextensive, but overlap in eastem S. Paulo and adjacent Minas Gerais, and both species have been collected in the BraziUan Federal District.
Possibly they may represent aspects of one polymorphic species.
Martius's collection from Bahia that Bentham cited (1876: 354) as M. cylindracea has become the type of M. coruscocaesia Bameby.
196bis.
Mimosa myuros Bameby, sp. nov., pinnis plurijugis et floribus dense anguste spicatis M. cylindraceae manifeste propinqua, sed ab ea floribus minimis pentameris vix 1.3 (nec tetrameris 2.1-2.5) mm longis diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Fazenda Sao Bento, Passa Quatro, 1650 m, Sa. da Mantiqueira, XL 1948 (alabastris submaturis sed filamentis nondum exsertis), Jose Vidal 27^9.—Holotypus, R 121028 (2 sheets).
M. v^rrwco^fl sensu Glaziou, 1906: 181 (Glaziou 8651, G! P!); non Bentham.
Unarmed shrub or tree (stature not recorded) with amply microphyllidious foliage, pubescent with arborescently or, by shortening of the seta's primary axis, substellately branched trichomes, the subconcolorous lfts either thinly strigulose or glabrate above, beneath thinly stellate overall or only on posterior half, the extremely slender flower-spikes usually 2-3 together in the axil of coevally expanding lvs.
Stipules narrowly lanceolate 5-10 X 1-1.3 mm, firm, dorsally 1-nerved above middle, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 6-11.5 cm, the petiole 20-40 x 0.6-1 mm, the interpinnal segments 6-15 mm; pinnae 5-9-jug., the larger ones at or beyond middle of If-stk, their rachis 4-8 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments ±1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (18-)25-37-jug., decrescent at both ends of rachis, the first pair 0.4- 1.5 mm distant from subulate or minute conic paraphyllidia 0.3-1.5 mm, the blades oblongovate obtuse, the larger ones ±4-5.5 x 1.5-2 mm and 2.3-2.7 times as long as wide, all plane, veinless above, faintly 2-nerved beneath, the midrib a little forwardly displaced, the posterior nerve weak.
Flower-spikes including short peduncle to 4 cm long and just prior to anthesis 3 mm diam.; bracts ovate, ±0.7 mm, thinly pilosulous dorsally; flowers 5-merous haplostemonous; calyx brownish, shallowly campanulate 0.5 mm, irregularly 5-6-toothed, the teeth low-deltate; corolla densely pallid-pubescent with entangled trichomes, ±1.3 mm, the ovate lobes ±0.6 mm; filaments (in bud) united basally into an obscure corona and alternating with minute blunt vestiges of staminodia; fruit unknown.
In unrecorded habitat but to be expected in moist montane woodland near 1600 m, collected twice, just prior to anthesis, high on Sa. da Mantiqueira near the s. border of Minas Gerais, Brazil: Fda. do rio Preto, near Itatiaia; Fda.
S. Bento, near Passa Quatro, near 22°30'S, 45°W.-F1.
XII-?.
When I first encountered Glaziou 8651, misidentified as M. verrucosa, I felt confident that the specimens represented an undescribed taxon of sect. Calothamnos, but the immaturity of the inflorescence precluded sure observation of the flower-structure.
Toward the end of this study I came across confirmatory material in the National Herbarium at Rio de Janeiro, which, although again immature, has flowers on the verge of opening, sufficiently advanced to show that they are pentamerous, unlike those of other spicate Calothamnos, and haplostemonous, unlike those of M verrucosa.
Mimosa myuros, so named for the extremely narrow mouse-tail flowerspikes, is evidently a close relative of M. cylindracea.
The leaf-formula is similar, except that both pinnae and leaflets attain slightly higher numbers, and the indumentum is similar, except less dense.
The flower-spikes at comparable age and state of development are only 3 (not 4.5-5) mm in diameter.
The extremely small size of the flower and its pentamerous perianth are, however, the decisive differential characters.
197.
Mimosa furfuracea Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 389.
1841.-"Brazil, Sello.''- Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)!; presumed isotypus, Sello 4772, +B = F. Neg. 1324\ M. furfuracea var. paranensis Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 374.
1964.-".
.
. estado de Parana, mun. Campo Largo, rio Papagaios .. .
Gert Hatschbach 249, fl. et fr.
5.
III.1946 "-Holotypus, SI, not seen; paratypus.
Warming s.n. e Lagoa Santa, Minas Gerais, K! M. furfuracea var. catharinensis Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 374.
1964.-"Brasilia, Santa Catharina [Munic.
Campo Alegre, Morro Iquererim, ah.
1400 m], Smith et Klein 7413."—Holotypus, SI (not seen); isotypi, NY! US! M. furfuracea sensu Bentham, 1875: 353, 1876: 411; Burkart, 1964: 372-373 (var.furfuracea); Morim de Lima, 1985, photo 16 (pod).
M. furfuracea var. catharinensis sensu Burkart, 1979: 168 + map.
Erect, freely branched unarmed shrubs ±1.7- 2.5 m, the homotinous leafy branches 2-3 dm, the stems, lf-stks and peduncles densely coarsely scabrous-tomentose with erect flavescent plumose setae to 0.5-1.2 mm and both faces of lfts with stalked, stellate or some shortly arborescent setulae to 0.15-0.3 mm taU, these crowded but not fully masking the green or brownish-olivaceous epidermis, the cylindroid or ovoid-ellipsoid fl-spikes either all axillary and surpassed by their subtending If or some later ones pseudoracemosely exserted from foliage.
Stipules erect firm, narrowly lanceolate 3-8 x 0.6-1.4 mm, densely plumose-setulose dorsally like adjoining stem, silky-pilosulous within, persistent.
Leafstalks including hard pulvinus 2-6(-8) cm, the petiole 1.5-3.5(-4) cm, at middle (0.5-)0.6-1.5 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 6-12(-15) mm; pinnae either exactly 2- or often 2-3-, 3-4- jug., subequilong or a little accrescent distally, the axis of longer ones 3-6(-7.5) cm, the interfoliolar segments 2-5 mm; lfts of distal pair of pinnae (ll-)12-18(-19)-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the sometimes unequal first pair 1- 2.5 mm distant from lance-subulate paraphyllidia 0.7-1.7 mm, the plane blades mostly oblongor ovate-, but the distal pair obovate-eUiptic from deeply semicordate base, at apex obtuse or obtuse-apiculate, those at and beyond mid-rachis 5.5-10 X 2.5-4.5(-4.8) mm, 2.1-2.5 times as long as wide, the moderately displaced midrib and one short posterior vein finely prominulous beneath but often concealed by vesture, invisible above.
Peduncles soUtary and 2-3-nate, 9-26 mm; y7(?w^r-5'/7/A:^5 without filaments 10-30 x 5.5-6.6 mm, (1.6-)2-5 times longer than diam.; bracts linear-oblanceolate 2-3 mm, just prior to anthesis either a little longer or shorter than the flbuds, densely pilosulous-stellate from middle upward, at tip silky-pilosulous or puberulent within; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx membranous, shallowly cupulate or patelliform 0.1-0.25 mm tall, extemally glabrous, the entire or obscurely crenulate rim ciliolate; corolla ovoidor turbinate-campanulate 2.5-3.2 mm, densely pallid-stellate overall and at tip often yellowish-plumulose, the firm, broadly ovate lobes 0.9-1.4 x 0.8-1 mm; filaments sulfur-yellow, monadelphous (with or without intervening rudimentary staminodia) through 0.7-1 mm, exserted 2.5-4.2 mm.
Pods usually several per spike, racemose and sessile, in profile from elliptic 1 -seeded to oblong or Unear-oblong and 2^-seeded, 7-21 x (4-)5-7(-8) mm, the scarcely constricted replum and low-convex, tardily disarticulating, firmly crustaceous-papery valves alike very densely scabrous-flocculose with erect plumose, either pallid, sordid or yellowish setae to 0.4-1.5 mm, these so close-set as to conceal face of valves, the tardily dehiscent and deciduous articles ±4.5-5.5 mm long; seeds compressed-obovoid ±4—4.5 X 2.5-3 mm, the testa lustrous black.
On rocky streambanks, in brejo thickets, at gallery margins and in upland campo, at elevations seldom recorded but ascending to 1100 m on the Planalto and 1400 m on Sa.
Geral in Sta. Catarina, discontinuously dispersed from extreme s. Minas Gerais s.-w. to extreme n. Sta. Catarina, recorded once from Distrito Federal (Braslandia, perhaps introduced).—R. IX-VII, perhaps intermittently through the year, fls and pods often coeval. —Chin-chin.
The obviously close relationship of M.furfuracea to M. cylindracea is discussed under the latter.
In M. furfuracea the length and color of setae on leaflets and pods are variable, but taxonomic recognition of the extreme states seems hardly justified.
Consequently I here commit to synonymy both var. paranensis, a robust state with pallid indumentum, and var. catharinensis, described from the southernmost known population of the species, which has relatively small leaves and relatively short indumentum on leaflets and pods, these moreover being exceptionally narrow (±4 mm) and appearing when immature more strongly compressed.
All are essentially uniform in leaf-formula and inflorescence.
198.
Mimosa barretoi Hoehne, Arq. Bot. Estado S. Paulo 1: 25, t. 20.
1938.-"Servi9o de Botanica e Agronomia: No. 38.121.—(Jardim Botanico de Belo Horizonte, n. 7.612 et outros, ex MELLO BARRETO, no. 6.476 e outros).
Serra do Cipo, kil.
128.
Palacio .
.
.
Minas Gerais.
2.9.933."—Lectotypus, not chosen; possible syntypus, Mello Barreto 6479, 14.
IV. 1935, R! M. barretoi sensu Burkart, 1964: 361.
Amply leafy unarmed shrubs 1.5-3 m, paniculately branched distally, densely gray-lanate throughout with fine entangled plumose or, on upper face of lfts, contracted and substellate setae 0.2-1 mm, the thick-textured lfts a little paler beneath than above, the solitary or paired flspikes axillary to synchronously developing lvs near tip of new branchlets, the fruits immersed in foliage.
Stipules erect firm, narrowly lanceolate 3-9 X 0.4-1.2 mm, densely lanate dorsally, persistent.
Leafstalks (0.7-) 1-5.5 cm, the petiole (0.7-)l-3.7 cm, including indumentum 1.5-2.7 mm diam., the one interpinnal segment (present only in some lower lvs) 8-18 mm; pinnae 1-2- jug., the rachis (3-)3.5-7 cm, the narrow ventral sulcus concealed by tomentum, the longer interfoliolar segments 5-8.5 mm; lfts (5-)6-9(-10)- jug., sessile against If-stk, subdecrescent proximally, the unequal first pair (1-) 1.5-4 mm distant from triangular or subulate paraphyllidia 1- 1.8 mm, the blades obliquely oblong, oblongovate or subrhombic-ovate from obliquely truncate, proximally obtusangulate base, apiculate at deltately acute or obtuse apex, those at mid-rachis (13-)14-20 X 6.5-9.5 mm, (1.6-)1.7- 2.3(-2.6) times as long as wide, all slenderly 4- 5-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade 1:1.5-2, the venation immersed but visible on upper face, prominulous beneath but commonly concealed by vesture.
Peduncles (1.5-)2-4 cm; spikes without filaments 7-8.5 mm diam., the axis 1.5-3 cm, the fls loosely subcontiguous, dimorphic, the majority staminate and relatively small, only a few distal ones bisexual and larger; bracts elliptic-oblanceolate or spatulate, within glabrous 1 -nerved, lanate extemally, those of staminate fls 1.6-2.4 x 0.5-0.9 mm, those of bisexual ones 3-4 x 0.7-1.4 mm, all deciduous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx a brown glabrous disc 0.4-0.5 mm diam.; corollas plumply ovoid-ellipsoid, rounded at base, the staminate ones 2.3-2.8 mm, the bisexual 3.2-5 mm, all cleft to middle into connivent, triangular or deltate lobes, densely lanate proximally with yellowish substellate setae and beyond middle with longer plumose gray-tipped setae; filaments stout terete, vivid citron-yellow, at base united through ±0.5 mm and exserted 6-7.5 mm, sometimes a minute tooth (vestigial staminode) between them; ovules ±6.
Pods few from near tip of spike-axis, in profile narrowly oblong, compressed but turgid, 30-40 x 4-4.5 mm but because of dense vesture appearing broader, the sublignescent replum ± 1 mm wide, the valves when ripe papery, separating from replum and breaking up into 5-6(-7) rhombic, individually dehiscent articles ± 6-7 mm long, the replum and valves alike concealed by a felt of closely packed erect plumose setae 2-2.5 mm; seeds obliquely descending, plumply obovoid ± 5 x 3 mm, the testa fiiscous dull.
In campo rupestre, sometimes forming thickets about outcrops, 1100-1350 m, endemic to the upper slopes of Sa. do Cipo, near 19°15'S in centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.—Fl.
VII, IX-II. Mimosa barretoi is readily distinguished from other spicate Calothamnos by its broad ample leaflets and thick spikes of relatively large flowers.
I have not seen the type, but fifteen approximate topotypes agreeing closely with the protologue leave no doubt about its identity.
The species was apparently first collected by Joaquim Candido da Costa Sena in August 1895 (=M senaei Glaziou, ined. in hb. Schwacke.
10748, P!) 199.
Mimosa aurivillus Martius, Rora 21(2, BeibL 4-5): 52 (=Herb. fl. bras. 132).
1838.- Typus infra sub var. aurivillo indicatur.
Unarmed, potentially arborescent shrubs (1-) 1.5-3.5(-4) m with trunk attaining 6 cm diam. (mostly less), the stems and lf-stks plumose-hispid or tomentose-floccose with sordid, yellowish, or rusty-golden setae to 0.2-0.45(-5) mm, these either branched throughout or (when long) smooth beyond middle, and sometimes intermixed with shorter stellae, the foliage either stellate or densely floccose-tomentulose with setulae 0.2-0.6 mm, the firm plane lfts usually strongly bicolored, when dry blackish or brownish-oUvaceous and either glabrous or thinly stellate above, beneath paler and varying from thinly stellate to densely tomentulose, the globose, ellipsoid or rarely oblong-ellipsoid capitula solitary or 2-5-nate in axil of contemporaneous lvs, sometimes appearing pseudoracemose in praefloration but soon lateral and immersed in foliage.
Stipules firm erect, lance-acuminate or narrowly triangular (1-)1.5-8(-10) x 0.4-1 mm, pubescent extemally like stem, glabrous within, persistent.
Leafstalks including pulvinus 0.4-7 cm, the petiole 0.2-3.5(—4) cm, the interpinnal segment(s) 2-12 mm; pinnae 2-8-jug., or of some depauperate upper lvs (no further described) 1-jug., the rachis of distal pair 2-7.5(-8.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (2-)3-7 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 5-18(-27)-jug., commonly accrescent distally, the first pair 1.5-3(-5) mm distant from linear-subulate, sometimes setiform paraphyllidia, the blades of all but the obliquely obovate distal pair either broadly rhombic-ovate or oblong-elUptic from broadly rounded or obliquely tmncate base, obtuse or bluntly deltate at apex, those near and above mid-rachis (5-)5.5- 13 X 3-7 mm, 1.6-2.3 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath finely 3-4(-5)-nerved from pulvinule, the moderately displaced costa sometimes obscurely branched, the inner posterior nerve expiring beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles solitary or commonly 2-5-nate (1-)1.5- 4.5(-6) cm; capzYw/a without filaments 6-9 x 4.5- 6.5 (in var. warmingii only x 3-3.5) mm, prior to anthesis moriform but the bract-tips sometimes emergent, the fl-buds canescently retrostrigulose and at tip yellowish-stellate; bracts linear 1-3 X 0.35-0.45 mm, dorsally stellate beyond middle, persistent;yZow^r^ mostly 4-merous 4-androus, sometimes a few at apex of receptacle 5-merous, all or almost all bisexual or a few lower ones staminate and shorter; calyx a shallow membranous ciliolate cup (0.1-)0.15-0.3 mm; corolla narrowly campanulate (1.5-) 1.8-2.7 mm, the ovate, distally involute but scarcely thickened lobes 0.7-1.2 x 0.5-0.75 mm; filaments sulfuror lemon-yellow, monadelphous through 0.4-0.9 mm, sometimes alternating with rudimentary staminodia, exserted (2-)2.4-4.3 mm.
Pods 1-several, sometimes to 20 per capitulum, sessile at cuneate base, in profile elliptic 1 -seeded to broadly Unear 4-seeded, 7-28 x (2.5-)3-6 mm, the replum 0.5-0.9 mm wide, shallowly constricted between seeds, the papery valves lowcolliculate over each seed, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into free-falling, elliptic or rhombic, individually dehiscent articles (4.5-)5-8 mm long, the replum and valves alike densely stellate-setulose or floccose-setose with erect yellowish, sordid or rusty plumulose setae to 0.3-3 mm; seeds narrowly or broadly compressed-obovoid ±3.5-4.8 x 2-3 mm, the testa brown or livid-castaneous dull.
The concept of M. aurivillus embodied in the foregoing description is much wider than any hitherto proposed.
It would have been preferable to maintain the traditional taxonomy and, following Burkart (1964), continue to recognize as distinct species M. aurivillus, M. calothamnos and M. sordida; but difficulties have arisen in modem collections.
All elements of M aurivillus sensu lato have essentially the same flower and pod, and differ among themselves principally in leaf-formula, in length, density and disposition of branched trichomes, and in outline of the capitula, which are seldom truly globose but vary capriciously from plumply ovoid to narrowly ellipsoid and to twice as long as their diameter.
None of these character states is stabilized and each varies independently of the others, with predictably perplexing results.
Moreover the outline of the capitulum, which previously has been employed as a key character, is especially unreliable; the trichomes vary subtly among populations otherwise similar; and even leaf-formula must be cautiously evaluated, because lush leaves below the flowering nodes are sometimes larger and more complex than later ones.
Within the collective species can be discerned two principal types, the ranges of which overlap widely in central Minas Gerais.
These are aurivillus sens, str., which has short leaf-stalks and relatively few leaflets coarsely thinly stellate on both faces and ranges from Sa. da Cara9a north into southern Bahia; and var. calothamnos, which has relatively long leaf-stalks and more numerous leaflets densely finely pannose-tomentulose beneath and ranges from Diamantina southward to Sa. dos Orgaos in Rio de Janeiro and into adjoining S. Paulo.
Where these are sympatric they are often readily distinguishable and behave as discrete species.
But in central and northem Minas Gerais have arisen combinations of characters, possibly by way of introgression, which bridge the discontinuity between them.
The entity described below as var. calothamnoides has the leaf-formula of var. aurivillus but the vesture of var. calothamnos.
The type of var. sordescens shows the vesture of var. aurivillus coupled with the leaf-formula of var. calothamnos.
Mimosa sordida and M. mogolensis are like var. sordescens except that the stellate hairs are smaller and finer, and in the second confined to the hypophyllum.
Key to varieties of M. aurivillus Lf-stks of all or most lvs less than 3 cm and petiole proper not over 11 mm; lfts at least thinly stellate on upper face.
2.
Fls 2-2.7 mm and capitula without filaments 6-9 x 5-6.5 mm; pod 4.5-6 mm wide; lfts of longer pinnae 5-11-jug.; s.-centr. Bahia to centr. Minas Gerais.
3.
Stellate trichomes on both faces of lfts spaced to reveal epidermis. .. 199a. var. aurivillus (p. 324).
3.
Stellate trichomes on dorsal face of lfts crowded, their intermeshed arms conceahng epidermis with a continuous carpet of tomentum 199d. var. calothamnoides (p. 325).
2.
Rs 1.5 mm and capitula without filaments 7 x 3-3.5 mm; pod 2.5-3 mm wide; lfts of longer pmnae 10-14-jug.; Lagda Santa in centr. Minas Gerais 199c. var. warmingii (p. 325).
Lf-stks 2-7 cm and petiole proper, at least of larger lvs, 1.5-3.5 cm; lfts often, but not consistently, glabrous on upper face.
4.
Lower face of lfts thinly stellate, the epidermis visible between trichomes; n.-centr. Minas Gerais.
199b. var. sordescens (p. 324).
4.
Lower face of lfts densely white-tomentulose with intermeshed stellae, the epidermis fully concealed; centr. Minas Gerais to S. Paulo 199e. var. calothamnos (p. 326).
199a. Mimosa aurivillus Martius var. aurivillus.
M. aurivillus Martius, 1838, I.e., sens, str.— ".
.
. in altis montibus ad Ouro Preto, in Serra da Cara9a, inter Capao et Pires et alibi Prov. Minarum."
—Lectotypus, Martius 1002 ex parte (ticket 328, 'Sa. da Caraga'), M!; syntypi, Martius 1002 ex parte (ticket 326, 'Sa. da Cara- 9a et inter Capao et Pires pr. Vila Rica' and without ticket.
Tires et Capao'), both M! M. peduncularis var. (?) rufescens Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 388.
1841.-"Serra da Lapa [Riedel, commun.] L^«^5^or^"—Holotypus, Riedel 13, K!; probable isotypi, Riedel 382/910, dated 18.
XI. 1824, USl Riedel s.n.,
A\ M. aurivillus sensu Bentham, 1875: 410, 1876: 351 (''aurivilldj, Burkart, 1964: 418.
M. peduncularis var. rufescens sensu Bentham, 1876: 352; Burkart, 1964: 422.
Potentially arborescent, at anthesis (1-)1.5- 3.5(-4) m, the stems and lf-stks plumose-hispid with setae to 0.5-4.5(-5) mm and branched to middle or beyond, the lfts stellate on both faces but not so densely as to conceal epidermis; stipules 1.5-10 X 0.5-1 mm; leaf-stalks mostly 0.4- 2, rarely 3 cm, the petiole proper 2-10(-l 1) mm; leaf-formula (i-)ii-iii/5-7(-8-l 1), the longer lfts 7-13 X 4-6 mm; capitula without filaments 6- 9 X 5-6.5 mm; calyx 0.2-0.3 mm; corolla 2-2.7 mm; pods 7-25 x (4.5_)5_6 mm.
In thickets on and around sandstone or schist outcrops, in campo rupestre and on rocky creek banks, 1100-1900 m, discontinuously dispersed from Pico de Almas near 13°30'S in interior Bahia s. along and near the crest of Sa. do Espinha90 to Sa. da Cara^a near 20°30'S in s.-centr. Minas Gerais.—Fl.
X-IV(-?), the fruit long persistent.
The var. aurivillus varies notably in length of arborescently branched or plumose setae that clothe the stems, leaf-stalks, axes of inflorescence, and pods, and to lesser degree in maximum leaflet-number.
All samples of it collected on Sa. da Caraga have longer cauline setae to 2- 4.5(-5) mm long and either glabrescent at tip or perfectly smooth beyond middle, commonly intermixed with shorter substellate setae.
Here the longer pinnae have five or six pairs of leaflets. whereas on Sa. da Lapa (M. peduncularis var. rufescens) they rise to nine pairs, without change in vesture.
Within a 50 kilometer radius of Diamantina, from which region many collections have been made in recent years, the cauline setae vary from about 0.6 to 2 mm in length and are plumulose from base to tip, while the leaflets are about 6-9 pairs.
On Pico de Almas in Bahia the setae are as at Diamantina but the leaflets rise to 10-11 pairs.
Around S. Joao da Chapada, a few kilometers north of Diamantina, Irwin collected three sets of specimens that show a collective range of 0.6-4.5 mm in maximum length of setae and 5-6 pairs in maximum leaflet-number.
On Cara^a the pod is plumosely setose with trichomes to 1-2 mm long, not significantly different from a recorded range of 0.4-2 mm in the vicinity of Diamantina.
It seems impossible to extract further subspecific taxa from the matrix of var. aurivillus, though the populations isolated (as at present appears) on Pico de Almas may have some claim to taxonomic status.
199b. Mimosa aurivillus Martius var. sordescens Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 351.
1876.—".
. .in Serra da Mendanha provinciae Minas Geraes: Gardner n. 5422."—Holotypus, collected VII. 1840 (fl jun), K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1848.
M. sordida Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 389.
1841.- "Brazil, Pohl."
, the locality elaborated in Martius, n. bras. 15(2): 353.
1876: "in provincia Minas Geraes ad Salgado [=Eng. do Antonio Salgado, ±18°S between Minas Novas and Itambe do Principe]."
— Holotypus, Pohl d.l461 = 3434, collected XI. 1820 (fl), K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1851; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1375, F! = F Neg. 54866, NY! W! M. mogolensis Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 416, fig. 11.
1964.—"BrasU: Minas Gerais, leg. Markgraf 3491, typus speciei.''—Holotypus, collected at "Varzea da Coronha ... a 1050 m.s.m.,
" SI, not seen; paratypi, "A. C. Brade y Mello Barreto 12.047 ... 12.
XI.1938 (RB 39.828 ... SI: [sphalm.] typus speciei.'', RB!).
M. sordida sensu Bentham, 1875: 411, 1876: 353; Burkart, 1964: 371.
M. aurivillus var. sordescens sensu Burkart, 1964: 419; Lewis, 1987, fig. 9L. Shrubs 12-30 dm, the stems and lf-stks shaggy-tomentulose with plumulose setae to 0.3-0.6 mm (±deciduous from older stems), the bicolored lfts dark brown above, paler beneath, stellate on both faces or glabrous above, the stellae spaced to reveal epidermis; stipules 1-3 mm; leafstalks 3-7 cm, the petiole 1.5-3 cm; leaf-formula (ii-)iii-viii/8-14(-15),thelongerlfts6-ll x 3.5- 7 mm; capitula without filaments either oblongellipsoid or shortly oblong 7-11 x 4.5-5 mm, ±1.4-2 times as long as diam.; calyx 0.2-0.3 mm; corolla 2-2.3 mm; pods not seen.
In habitats not recorded in detail, to be expected at gallery-margins or in cerrado thickets near 1000 m, local in Sa. do Espinha90 of n.- centr. Minas Gerais between Sa. do Grao Mogol and Sa. da Mendanha, lat. ±16°30'-18°S.-n. IV-VIII, XI-XII, the full season unknown.
The type of M. aurivillus var. sordescens, collected in very early flower and lush leaf in June, and that of M. sordida, collected in full flower in November and lacking the probably larger primary cauline leaves, differ somewhat in pubescence, size ofleaflets, and outline of capitula.
The stellate trichomes ofvar. sordescens are relatively coarse, as in var. aurivillus, and the capitula of M. sordida are proportionately longer.
They are alike in leaf-formula, and the localities are not more than fifty kilometers apart in the adjoining municipios of Diamantina and Itamarandiba.
Mimosa mogolensis, known to me from the protologue and from an approximate topotype (Hatschbach 41420, 1ST) is interpreted as a minor variant with leaflets glabrous on the upper face.
It is otherwise like the type of M. sordida.
The taxonomic significance in this group of relatively long and short flowering receptacle and consequently more or less elongate-ellipsoid capitulum has been overemphasized.
199c. Mimosa aurivillus Martius var. warmingii Bameby, var. nov., petioUs brevibus (5-11 mm) foliolisque utrinque parce subaequidense stellatis cum var. aurivillo conveniens, ab ilia flosculis minimis (±1.5 mm longis) necnon legumine angusto 3-3.5 (nec 4.5-6) mm lato diversa; a var. sordida, cui holotypum warmingianum retulit Bentham.,
iisdem notuUs et ulterius petiolis abbreviatis distantior videtur.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Lagoa Santa, 24.
XI.1863 (fl, fr), E. Warming 5.«.-Holotypus, C = F Neg. 21890; isotypus, F. Treelets of unknown stature, the yoimg stems shaggy with plumose setulae less than 1 mm, the subconcolorous lfts thinly stellate on both faces; stipules 3-4 x 0.5-0.7 mm; leaf-stalks 20-45 mm, the petiole 5-10 mm; lf-formula (i-)ii(-iii)/ 10-14, the longer lfts 7-10 x 3-4 mm; capitula oblong or cylindric, without filaments ± 7-20 x 3-3.5 mm; calyx 0.1 mm; corolla 1.3-1.5 mm; pods 15-25 X 2.5-3 mm, (1-)2-4-seeded.
In woodland near 850 m, known only from the type-collection made near Lagoa Santa, 19°40'S in centr. Minas Gerais.-H. ±X-XI. The type of var. warmingii was associated by Bentham in Flora brasiliensis with that of M. sordida, but differs materially in very short petioles and particularly in the minute flowers bome in narrowly oblong (almost cylindric) heads and in the exceptionally narrow pod.
The pod is reminiscent of M. daleoides, rather than of other varieties of M. aurivillus, but the pinnae are mostly bijugate.
Indumentum of the leaflets is that of var. sordida and var. aurivillus.
199d. Mimosa aurivillus Martius var. calothamnoides Bameby, var. nov., inter var. aurivillum et var. calothamnum ambigens, fortasse proles hybrida ex iis orta, cum ilia petiolis communibus petioloque vero abbreviatis sed cum hac foliolis dorso stellis confertissimis epidermin totam occultantibus obsitis albido-tomenteUis congrua, ita M. aurivillum et M. calothamnum, hucusque pro speciebus facile distinguendis aestimatis, colligans.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: ±10 km s.-w. of Diamantina, 1250 m, 3.
II.1972 (fr), W. R. Anderson (with Stieber & Kirkbride) 552^7.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, NY, P, R, US. Shrubs 1.5-2 m, the stems and lf-stks tomentose with setae to 0.3-1.3 mm plumose from base to tip, the lfts stellate on both faces but thinly so and dark brown (when dry) above, beneath densely tomentulose with interlocking stellae; stipules 2-3.5 mm; leaf-stalks l-3(-4) cm, the petiole proper 5-9(-14) mm; leaf-formula ii-iii/ 7-10(-13), the larger lfts 5-10 x 3.5-5 mm; capitula without filaments 6-9 x 5-6 mm; calyx 0.1-0.2 mm; coroUa 2-2.4 mm; pods 10-26 x 4-5 mm.
In thickets on steep rocky hillsides, on streambanks and at edge of gallery woodland, 1000- 1250 m, locally plentiful high on the w. slope of Sa. do Espinha90 in mun. Datas and Gouveia, near I8*'30'S in centr. Minas Gerais.-Fl.
XI-IIL The var. calothamnoides is crucial to the classification of M. aurivillus sensu lato because in it are combined characters previously thought to distinguish the closely related M. aurivillus sens, str., M. calothamnos, and M. sordida: the short leaf-stalks and relatively few leaflets of aurivillus; the dorsally tomentose leaflets of calothamnos, thinly stellate above and of the same number as in sordida (=var. sordescens of this account).
The vars. aurivillus and calothamnos are sympatric in the range of var. calothamnoides, which may perhaps represent a set of localized, self-perpetuating hybrids.
However, where var. calothamnos and var. aurivillus coincide further south, as on Sa. da Cara9a, no intermediates have been detected.
A specimen from Sa.
Capara6 in southeastem Minas (H. C de Lima 2575, RB), superficially similar, requires critical revision.
199e. Mimosa aurivillus Martius var. calothamnos (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. calothamnos Martius ex Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 388.
1841.-"Mart.
! Herb. Fl.
Bras. exs. n. 1089 .
.
.
Minas Geraes, Claussen, Sello, Martius. "
—Lectotypus (Burkart, 1964:415): Martius 1089, K! = NY Neg. 1847; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 5^577, G! M (labelled "Sa. da Cara5a, Jun. 1839")!,
NY (2 sheets)! S! W!; syntypi, Sello s.n.,
G!W! M. calothamnossenswBentham, 1875:410,1876: 350, t. 87; Burkart, 1964:414.
Strictly erect or ascending, when young sometimes wandlike, when adult potentially arborescent shrubs 2-3 m with straight virgate homotinous leafy branches to 3-4 dm consisting of intemodes to 2-9 cm, the young stems and lfstks densely floccose-tomentulose with entangled sordid-gray plumose setulae to 0.2-0.6 mm, the lfts bicolored, above brown glabrous or exceptionally thinly stellate sublustrous, beneath graystellate-tomentulose or floccose-setulose; stipules (2.5-)5-8 X 0.4-1 mm; leaf-formula (i-)ii-iY(-Y)/ (ll-)12-19(-27), the longer lfts 5.5-11(-12.5) x 3.3-6(-6.5) mm; capitula plumply ovoid-ellipsoid or subglobose, without filaments 6-10(-l 1) X (4.5-)5-6 mm; calyx 0.15-0.2 mm; pods 10- 28 X 4-5 mm, (1-)2-4-seeded.
On stony hillsides near upper edge of cerrado and ascending in open places about outcrops into campo rupestre, on schist and sandstone, 1100- 1800 m, discontinuously dispersed along Sa. do Espinha^o s.-ward from ± 18°30'S in centr. Minas Gerais to Sa. da Mantiqueira, Sa. dos Orgaos in Rio de Janeiro, and Sa. da Bocaina in the e. lobe of S. Paulo.-Fl. (IX-)X-in.
200.
Mimosa peduncularis Bongard ex Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 388.
1841, sens, str., var. exclus.—"Brazil, Sello; 'Cachoeira [do Campo,' Riedel, commun.] Langsdorff.''— Lectotypus (Burkart, 1964: 421), Riedel 15, K (hb. Benth.)!; isotypi, A! and, renumbered i?z>- del 1307 and dated 18.
XII.1824, when Riedel was on Sa.
Grande de Jequitinhonha s. of Diamantina, Minas Gerais, E! GH! K! P! US! = NY Neg. 11836; presumed syntypi, Sello 273, Fl, Sello s.n.,
G! K! W! M. peduncularis sensu Bentham, 1875:411, 1876:352, exclus. var.; Burkart, 1964: 421 (var. peduncularis).
Unarmed shrubs attaining 12(-?) dm, the livid subglaucescent, pliantly few-branched stems lfstks and peduncles densely hispid with perpendicular glabrous castaneous setae to 3-5.5 mm, the many small lvs brown when dry and discolorous, the lfts delicately stellate on both faces, paler beneath, the small ellipsoid capitula 2-3-nate in distal If-axils, never pseudoracemose.
Stipules firm erect, ovate or broadly lance-acuminate 5- 7.5 X 1.5-2.3 mm, dorsally glabrous and prominently 2-4-nerved from base, the nerves ramulose distally, the persistent blades setose-ciliolate beyond middle.
Leaf-stalks 5-23 mm; petiole including livid pulvinus 4-7 x 0.3-0.4 mm, the interpetiolar segments 2.5-5.5 mm, the ventral groove obscure, spicules 0; pinnae (1-)2-4-jug., the rachis of slightly longer distal pair 13-30 mm, the interfoliolar segments 2-3.5 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 5-8-jug., subaccrescent distally, the first pair ±1-1.6 mm distant from narrowly subulate paraphyllidia 0.6-1.2 mm, the blades obovate or elliptic-obovate from broadly semicordate base, at apex obtuse mucronulate, those beyond midrachis 4-7 X 2.2-4.2 mm, ±1.4-2.2 times as long as wide, all subequally stellate on both faces, the stellae short-stalked, mostly 5-9-armed, not concealing the epidermis of 1ft, the venation of upper face immersed, of lower face faint, the midrib subcentric, 1 posterior nerve sometimes perceptible.
Peduncles very slender 1.5-5.5 cm, setose like stems; capitula relatively fewand loosely flowered, without either filaments or emergent bracts 3-4.7(-5) mm diam.; bracts narrowly lance-attenuate 1.7-2.6 x 0.3-0.4 mm, glabrous and strongly 1-nerved dorsally, beyond middle weakly setose-ciliolate;yZow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, apparently all bisexual; calyx subscarious, shallowly campanulate ±0.1 mm, the obscurely lobulate rim ciliolate with setulae not over 0.2 mm; corollas narrowly turbinate 1.6- 2.3 mm, densely steUate-tomentuIose overall, the ovate concave lobes ±0.7 x 0.45-0.55 mm; filaments (presumably ochroleucous when fresh) monadelphous through 0.5-0.7 mm, altemating with staminodia free for ±0.2 mm, exserted 2.5- 3.5 mm.
Pods few per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately Unear-oblong 10-17 x 3-5 mm, cuneately contracted at both ends, mostly 2-3- seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.3-0.35 mm wide, the papery valves concealed by a dense coat of yellowish stellae and loosely ascending, weakly plumulose setae 1-2.2 mm, when ripe breaking up into free-falling biconvex articles ± 5 mm long; seeds unknown.
In unrecorded habitat; to be sought in campo rupestre or about rock piles on and near the crest of Sa. do Espinha90 in centr. Minas Gerais, once recently collected between Diamantina and Gouveia (±18°30'S), the syntypes originating probably not at Cachoeira do Campo near Ouro Preto but on the headwaters of rio Jequitinhonha near 18°30'S.-n. ±XII-I. Mimosa peduncularis is very closely related to the M. aurivillus complex and perhaps better viewed as an aberrant element of it.
The smooth castaneous, non-plumose cauline setae combined with very slender capitula 3-5 mm diam. are visually striking, but A. aurivillus var. warmingii has equally small flower-heads and ultimately the sole reliable difference is in the indumentum.
The disposition of the species can well be deferred, however, until we have further contemporary evidence of its stature, habitat, dispersal, and of the constancy within a population of smooth setae.
201.
Mimosa leprosa (Bentham) Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 12.
I919.-Typus infra sub var. leprosa indicatur.
Spreading-erect unarmed shrubs 5-30 dm, resembling M. calodendron in defoliate tmnks and densely leafy crown of foliage but the homotinous branchlets straight or only obscurely ffexuous, the longer intemodes 1-6 cm, the lfts glabrous but opaque above, the sordid-whitish or brownish stellate (or along midrib plumulose) tomentum of lower face sometimes deciduous, the ffs at once smaller and proximally glabrate or thinly retro-strigulose (not uniformly stellate) and forming smaller ellipsoid or subglobose capitula.
Stipules deltate 1-1.5 mm, persistent.
Leaf-stalks l-3(-3.5) cm, the petiole 5-15(-20) mm, the interpinnal segments (when present) 4- 10(-1I) mm; pinnae either l(-2)- or (1-)2(-3)- jug., when more than 1 pair either subequilong or the distal pair a little longer, the rachis of this 2-6 cm, the interfoliolar segments 2.5-5.5(-6) mm; lfts of distal pinnae (8-)9-l 5-jug., proximally decrescent, the blades obtusely rhombicovate from obliquely truncate base, those at and beyond mid-rachis (5-)6-l 1.5 x (2-)3-4.7 mm, 2-2.7 times as long as wide, the venulation as in M. calodendron.
Peduncles 1.5-3.5 cm; capitula ellipsoid or subglobose, without filaments 4-11 X 3-5 mm; bracts oblanceolate or obovate-cuneate 0.6-1 mm, tomentulose dorsally at tip; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx shallowly campanulate, obscurely lobulate, 0.2-0.3 x 0.4- 0.6 mm, the rim either ciliolate or subglabrous; corolla 1.4-2.1 mm, the ovate lobes 0.8-1 x 0.5- 0.8 mm; filaments sulfur-yellow, monadelphous through ±0.5 mm and altemating with vestigial staminodia, exserted 2.5-3.7 mm.
Pods to 10 per capitulum but mostly fewer, in profile from elliptic 1-seeded to broad-linear 2-3(-^)-seeded, 10-21 (-25) X 5-6 mm, cuneate at both ends, the replum 0.75-1 mm wide, shallowly undulateconstricted between seeds, the replum and valves alike grayishor brownish-lepidote-tomentulose with stelliform setulae not over 0.25 mm tall, the ripe valves separating from replum and breaking into elliptic or rhombic-elliptic, individually dehiscent articles 5-8 mm long; seeds black sublustrous 4.2-5 X 2.8-3.5 mm.
Mimosa leprosa is closely related both to M. calodendron and to M. aurivillus var. calothamnos, resembling the former in the deltate stipules but differing in the dull upper face of leaflets, shorter narrower capitula, and especially in proximally glabrate or thinly retrostrigulose corollas.
In habit and outline of capitula it is intermediate between M. aurivillus var. calothamnos and M. calodendron and, if subordinated to either, precludes a satisfactory definition of either.
So far as known, M. leprosa is endemic to Sas. da Piedade and Cara^a, where it occupies the habitat ofM. calodendron in the serras immediately adjacent to Belo Horizonte, that is, the bare rockledges and stony iron-rich soils of the summits above 1700 meters.
Mimosa calodendron also occurs in both these serras, but is definitely recorded only from below 1600 meters.
The populations of M. leprosa on the two serras are not identical, but have diverged to the point where they can usefully be recognized taxonomically.
Key to varieties of Af. leprosa 1.
Pinnae of most lvs 2-jug., of some early vigorous lvs 3- and of occasional distal depauperate ones 1-jug.; successive lfts mostly subcontiguous or narrowly imbricate, and the tomentum of their lower face readUy deciduous in age; capitula without filaments ellipsoid 7-11 x 4.5-5 mm; Sa. da Piedade 201a. var. leprosa (p. 328).
1.
Pinnae of most lvs exactly 1-jug., of very few vigorous early lvs below the inflorescence 2-jug.; successive lfts well separated by gaps ± 1 mm wide, and the tomentum of their lower face permanently dense; capitula without filaments subglobose 4-6 x 3-4.5 mm; Sa. da Cara^a.
.
201b. var. parviceps (p. 328).
201a. Mimosa leprosa (Bentham) Macbride var. leprosa.
M. leprosa (Bentham) Macbride, sens, str., based on M. calodendron var. leprosa Bongard ex Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 352.
1876.—"Habitat in Sa. da Lapa et Sa. da Piedade: Riedel, Gardner n. 4521, Warming.''—Ijectotypus (Burkart, 1964: 370), Riedel 2909, K!; isotypi, GH! NY!-The specimen acquired by Bentham from LE that is numbered Riedel 20 is probably part of the larger set distributed as 2909.—Syntypi, Warming s.n. e Sa. da Piedade in 1864, F! NY! M. calodendron var. transiens Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 370.
1964.-"Minas Gerais ?,
Glaziou sine loc, nos.
7591 [fide Glaziou, 1906:181, sub M. calodendro, from 'Fda.
Taquaral, au Morro Cavado'].
.
. (typus var.) et 8430 [fide Glaziou, 1906: 181, sub M. furfuracea, from 'Entre Sitio et Barbacena'] ... Claussen 120, aiio 1843... ."—Holotypus, C!; paratypi, Claussen 120, NY! P! M. calodendron sensu Hoehne, 1919, est. 138.
M. calodendron var. leprosa sensu Burkart, 1964: 369.
Characters as given in key; corolla glabrous through lower V3-V2, thence thinly retrostrigulose, stellate only at tip.
Ledges and crevices of rock outcrops or sandpockets on flat mountain tops, limited to ironrich substrates, 1800-2000 m, known for certain only from the upper levels of Sa. da Piedade in centr. Minas Gerais.-R. XI-?,
fr. ripe in I, the full season undetermined.
201b. Mimosa leprosa (Bentham) Macbride var. parviceps Bameby, var. nov., a var. leprosa imprimis foUomm pinnis fere omnium 1-jugis, raromm imomm 2-jugis, nuUomm 3-jugis, capitulisque minimis absque filamentis 4- 6 X 3-4.5 (nec 7-11 x 4.5-5) mm diversa.— Brazil.
Minas Gerais: sandstone summit of Sa. da Caraga, 1750-1950 m, 25.1.1971 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Harley & Onishi) 29/56.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Characters as given in key: corolla-tube thinly retrostrigulose, the lobes stellate.
Habitat of var. leprosa, 1750-2020 m, known only from upper levels of Sa. da Cara^a, centr. Minas Gerais.—Fl.
VII-VIII, I, the full season undetermined.
202.
Mimosa calodendron Martius ex Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 389.
1841.-"[Herb. R Bras, exs.] n. 1087 .
.
.
Minas Geraes, [Riedel, commun.] Langsdorff, Sello, Martius."
—lectotypus, Martius 1087, K!; isotypi, +B = FNeg.
1309, F! = F Neg 54815, G! M! NY! S! W!; presumed syntypus, Riedel s.n. from Pico de Itabira, M! M. calodendron var. unijuga Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2- 4): 370.
1964.—"Minas Geraes, Serra da Caveira, Municipio de Betim . .. 1600 m, L. O. Williams et V. Assis 625^."—Holotypus, SI, not seen; isotypus, GH! M. calodendron sensu Bentham, 1875:411, 1876: 352, exclus. var. leprosa; Hoehne, 1919, est. 138; Burkart, 1964: 368 (var. calodendron).
Unarmed, roundor flat-topped shrubs 5-20 dm with many defoliate, abruptly flexuous or zigzag tmnks branching distally into closely leafy homotinous branchlets 5-12 cm, the longer internodes mostly l-1.5(-2.5) cm, the young branchlets, lf-stks and peduncles densely floccose-tomentulose with erect plumulose setulae 0.2-0.9 mm, the crowded lvs notably bicolored, when dry lustrous dark brown above, beneath lanate-tomentulose with pallid enlaced stelUform setae fully concealing the epidermis, the oblong-ellipsoid capitula soUtary or 2-3(-4) together in upper If-axils, together forming a subcorymbose, scarcely or shortly exserted panicle.
Stipules firm deltate 0.7-1.5 mm, appressed to stem, pubescent dorsally Uke stem, indurate-persistent.
Leaf-stalks including hard pulvinus (6-)8- 22 mm, the stout petiole 4-12 x 0.7-1.2 mm, the interpinnal segments (2-)4-l 1 mm, the ventral groove intermpted at insertion of pinnae by a ridge but spicule 0; pinnae (1-)2-3-jug., the distal pair longest, the rachis of these (2-)2.5- 4.5(-5) cm, the longer interfoUolar segments 3.5- 6 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 6-ll(-12)-jug., decrescent proximally, the first pair 1-2.5 mm distant from minute subulate or occasionally dilated and foliolose paraphyllidia, the firm plane or dorsally shallow-concave blades obtusely rhombicoblong (the furthest pair commonly rhombic-obovate) from obliquely truncate base, obtuse or subtruncate at apex, those at and beyond midrachis 5.5-9 X 3.2-5.5 mm, 1.2-1.8(-1.9) times as long as wide, all obscurely 3-4-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide the blade ±1:2, the inner posterior nerve expiring well above mid-blade, the venation weakly discernible but essentially immersed above, bluntly low-prominulous beneath but buried in vesture.
Peduncles l-3(-3.5) cm; capitula without filaments oblong-ellipsoid or shortly cylindric 11- 19(-25) X (4-)5-6.5mm, 1.8-3(-4) times as long as diam.; bracts obovate-spatulate or ovate 0.4- 1 mm, dorsally tomentulose at tip, castaneous glabrous otherwise, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus or a few distal ones 5-merous; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate 0.4-0.8 x 0.7-1 mm, glabrous extemally, ciliolate; corolla extemally densely gray-stellate overall 1.9-2.8 mm, the ovate, apically hooded lobes 1-1.3 x 0.6-0.9 mm; filaments sulfur-yellow, monadelphous through 0.3-0.8 mm and altemating with mdimentary staminodia, exserted 3-6 mm.
Pods not seen fully ripe; according to Burkart (1964) 12-25 X 5-5.5 mm, 2-4-seeded, seeds probably not significantly different from those of M. leprosa.
In campo rupestre and about cliffs and outcrops, in iron-rich canga soils, 1200-1750 m, endemic to the heights of Sa. do Espinhago close to and immediately s. of Belo Horizonte, lat. 19°50'-20°20'S in centr. Minas Gerais (Sas.
Rola Moca, do Curral, da Matuca, da Moeda, and da Cara9a; Picos de Itabira and Itabirito).—Fl.
XIIn.
I here retum to Bentham's original narrow concept of M. calodendron, and consider his var. leprosa as a sibling species that replaces it on Sa. da Piedade.
The concentration of the season's foliage into short, densely leafy and often abruptly flexuous terminal branches, the lustrous epiphyllum ofthe leaflets contrasting with their pannosely pallid-tomentose hypophyllum, the plumper capitula, the corolla stellate overall and not merely on the lobes, and the sUghtly deeper calyx seem to constitute an adequate specific syndrome.
Where M. calodendron is sympatric, on Sa. da Caraga, with M. leprosa, this is represented by its var. parviceps, clearly different in leaves well distributed along extended homotinous branches and extremely small capitula 3-4.5, not 5-6.5 mm in diameter.
203.
Mimosa macedoana Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 389.
1964.—Typus infra sub var. macedoana indicatur.
Slender unarmed shrubs of rounded outline, attaining 2 m but in exposed rocky places dwarfed to 4 dm, the young stems, lf-stks and peduncles densely sordid-tomentulose with fine erect brown but gray-plumose setae to 0.2-0.45 mm, the older stems glabrate, vertically striped, the foliage bicolored, the lfts (dry) above dark brownishgreen, glabrous but dull, beneath paler and thinly stellate-pubescent, the small subglobose capitula solitary and 2-4-nate in distal If-axils, the pods immersed in foliage.
Stipules triangular-subulate 0.8-1.5 mm, tomentulose like adjacent stem, caducous.
Leaf-stalks 7-30 mm, the petiole including hard pulvinus 7-12 mm, at middle 0.6- 1 mm diam., broadly shallowly sulcate ventrally, the interpinnal segments (when present) 6-9 mm; pinnae l-^-, in mostly plants uniformly either 1- or 1-2-, but in some vigorous lower lvs 2-4- jug., subaccrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 2-5 cm, the interfoliolar segments (2-)3-5 mm, successive lfts in var. macedoana separated or barely contiguous, in var. glabrescens imbricate; lfts of geminate or of longer pinnae (5-)6- 10(-11)- or in var. glabrescens to 17-19-jug., subdecrescent proximally, the subsymmetrical first pair (1-)2-3 mm distant from minute subulate paraphyllidia immersed in setulae, all sessile against the rachis by obliquely truncate base, the blades subrhombic-ovate-oblong and obtuse apiculate or the furthest pair proportionately broad and obUquely obovate obtuse, the larger ones 5-9.5(-13) x (2.2-)2.5^.5 mm, 1.7-2.7 330 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 times as long as wide, all 3-5-nerved from pulvinule, the centric or slightly displaced midrib 1-2-branched near and beyond mid-blade, the venation immersed but perceptible above, prominulous beneath.
Peduncles 10-24 mm; capitula without filaments 3-4(-4.5) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid fl-buds densely stellate; bracts obovate-oblong 0.5-0.8 mm, dorsally stellate beyond middle; flowers slightly accrescent upward through the capitulum, mostly 4-merous 4-androus but the corolla exceptionally 5-merous, only a few distal ones bisexual; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate-patelliform 0.15-0.2 mm glabrous; corollas obovoid-turbinate firm-textured, densely sordid-stellate extemally overall, 1.6-2.2 mm, the shallowly concave ovate lobes 0.7-1 x 0.5-0.65 mm, veinless; filaments whitish, obscurely monadelphous at very base, exserted 2-3.7 mm, altemating staminodial vestiges 0.
Pods (few seen) 1-2 per capitulum, sessile, when well fertilized narrowly oblong in profile ±20-25 x 4.5-5 mm, 4-seeded, the shallowly minutely undulate-constricted replum 0.8 mm wide, the mature valves papery, low-colliculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely sordid-stellate overall, the valves at length separating from replum and from one another, falling as dehiscent articles 4.5-5 mm long; seeds obtusely compressed-rhomboid ± 3 x 3 mm, the testa dull brown.
In most characters of habit and foliage M. macedoana seems scarcely more than a glabrate phase of M. aurivillus sensu lato, but it is further distinguished by the extremely small capitula, in this respect nearer to M. chrysastra, which see for comment.
The type of M. macedoana has 1- 2 pairs of pinnae per leaf, but among leaves of subsequent collections from Sa. do Cipo there is one example of a single pair of pinnae in all leaves and others of as many as four pairs per leaf.
In all of these the leaflet-blades are narrower, or at least not wider, than the space between successive pairs.
The type of M. sordida var. glabrescens, also from Sa. do Cipo, differs in leaf-formula of ii-iii/17-19, with the more numerous leaflets more crowded along the rachis and consequently imbricate.
This has, however, the tiny capitula of M. macedoana, to which it seems more closely akin than to M. sordida (=M. aurivillus var. sordescens of this account), and for this reason is transferred.
Key to varieties of M. macedoana I. Lfts of longer pinnae (5-)6-l 0(-l l)-jug., 3-5 mm apart along rachis, the blades consequently separated or barely contiguous 203a. var. macedoana (p. 330).
1.
Lfts of longer pinnae 17-19-jug., not over 2 mm apart along rachis, the blades consequently imbricate 203b. var. glabrescens (p. 330).
203a. Mimosa macedoana Burkart var. macedoana.
M. macedoana Burkart, 1964, I.e., fig, 6, lam. 3, sens, str.—"Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Serra do Cipo, km 128 .
.
. leg. A. P. Duarte 2^97.-Holotypus, RB 70698!; isotypus (not seen), SI.
Characterized in key to varieties.
On sandstone outcrops and in campo rupestre at ± 1125-1275 m, known only from the heights of Sa. do Cipo, near 19°15'S, and from mun. Gouveia, near 18°30'S in upland centr. Minas Gerais.—Fl.
I-V. 203b. Mimosa macedoana Burkart var. glabrescens (Burkart) Bameby, comb. nov. M. sordida var. glabrescens Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 372.
1964.—"BrazU.
Minas Gerais, Serra do Cipo, leg. Sena VII. 1895 ex herb.
Schwacke 11.759 in hb. Paris."
-Holotypus, P! = NY Neg. 11822.
Characterized in key to varieties.
In unrecorded habitat, very likely that of var. macedoana, known only from the type-collection, taken in young flower in July on Sa. do Cipo.
204.
Mimosa chrysastra Martius ex Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 410.
1875 & in Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 349.
1876.-Typus infra sub var. chrysastra indicatur.
Slender erect unarmed microphylUdious shrubs ±6-14 dm with verticsdly striped defoliate trunks branched distally into a densely foliate crown, the young branchlets, newly expanding foliage and peduncles densely sordid-stellate but the indumentum deciduous, the mature lvs duU olivaceous, glabrous on both faces and on margin, the small whitish capitula solitary and geminate in distal If-axils on very slender peduncles, immersed in foliage.
Stipules firm, narrowly triangular-ovate 0.5-1.2 mm, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks including moderately swollen pulvinus 2-24 mm, the petiole 2-8.5 x 0.45-0.75 mm, openly sulcate ventrally, spicules 0; pinnae either exactly 1- or 2-4(-5)-jug., the rachis of longer (or only) pair 1.5-6 cm, the interfoUolar segments 0.8-3.7 mm, excavated on each side of ventral ridge; lfts (10-)12-22-jug., the smaU first pair 0.5-0.9 mm distant from minute or vestigial paraphyllidia, scarcely graduated upward, the blades subsessile against the rachis by obliquely truncate, postically retro-angulate base, in outline asymmetrically ovate obtuse, the larger ones 2-6 X 0.75-2.3 mm, ±2-2.3 times as long as wide, at times subundulate marginally, all veinless above, the moderately displaced midrib with 1 short posterior nerve faintly perceptible but scarcely prominulous beneath.
Peduncles 7-23 mm; capitula plumply ovoid ±20-2 5-fld, without filaments 2.5-3 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds thinly puberulent with simple, mostly retrorse hairs; bracts firm obovate or ovate 0.4-0.6 mm, persistent; y/ovv^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, only a few distal ones bisexual, these scarcely larger than the staminate ones; calyx shaUowly open-campanulate 0.2-0.3 mm, the irregularly lobulate rim minutely ciliolate; corolla turbinate 1.6-2 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave, obscurely 1-nerved lobes 0.7-1 x 0.5- 0.7 mm; filaments whitish drying dull yellowish, monadelphous through 0.3-0.5 mm into a cup without intervening staminodial rudiments, exserted ±3.5 mm.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, in profile narrowly oblong, cuneately attenuate at both ends, sometimes incipiently stipitate, the piano-compressed body (10-) 17-25 x 4-4.5 mm, (1-)2-3-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum ±0.4-0.7 mm wide, the papery brownish valves at length coUiculate over each seed, finally breaking up into free-falling articles ±6-7.5 mm long, the replum and valves alike thinly sordid-stellate overall; seeds basipetally descending, narrowly obovoid ± 5 x 3 mm, the testa smooth dull.
Mimosa chrysastra, which appeared isolated when first described, now finds a close relationship in M. macedoana, vicariant on Sa. do Cipo.
It resembles M. macedoana in glabrescent leaflets and small globose capitula, but differs in smaller, dorsally quite glabrous, weakly 2-nerved (not dorsally thin-stellate and prominulously 3 - 5-nerved) leaflets and in thinly retropuberulent, not stellate corolla.
Like M. macedoana it occurs with two leaf-pattems, conveniently treated as varieties.
Key to varieties of M. chrysastra 1.
Lf-stks 9-24 mm, the pinnae (of rare lower lvs l-)2-3(-5)-jug.; lfts of distal pinnae 17-21-jug., the pairs 0.8-1.3 mm apart, the largest 2-2.6 x 0.75-1 mm 204a. var. itambeana (p. 331).
1.
Lf-stks 2-8.5 mm, the pinnae exactly 1-jug., lfts (10-)12~22-jug., the pairs 1.5-3.7 mm apart, the largest lfts 2.7-6 x 0.75-2.3 mm 204b. var. chrysastra (p. 331).
204a. Mimosa chrysastra Martius ex Bentham var. itambeana Bameby, var. nov., cum var. chrysastra habitu, pube, flosculis et legumine toto congrua, foliorum autem formula graviter dispar: foliorum plurimorum petiolus communis 9-24 (nec 2-8.5) mm longus pinnaeque 2-3-jugae, foliorum imorum rarius 1-summorumque usque 5-jugae (nec omnium exacte 1-jugae); foliola subdimidio minora, ad maximum 2-2.6 X 0.75-1 (nec 2.7-6 x 1.3-2.3) mm.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Pico de Itambe in Sa. do Gaviao, 2000 m, 10.
IX.1974 (fl, fr), Regina Wels Windisch & A. Ghilldny 180. — Holotypus, BRADE 61233; clastotypus (fragm), NY.
M. itambeana Bameby, in sched.,
nom. nud. Characters as given in key to varieties.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be sought in campo rupestre or rock-crevices near 2000 m, known only from Pico de Itambe, at 18°25'S in centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.-R. IX-X(-?).
204b. Mimosa chrysastra Martius ex Bentham var. chrysastra.
M. chrysastra Martius ex Bentham, 1875, 1876, U.cc, sens, str.—"Habitat in summo monte Itambe provinciae Minas Geraes: Martius."
—Holotypus, collected 5.
VL1818 (fr), M! = F Neg. 6177.
M. chrysastra sensu Burkart, 1964: 388.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
Forming low thickets in shallow humus-rich soU overlying sandstone bedrock, locally plentiful on upper slopes and summit, near 2250 m, of Pico de Itambe, at 18°25'S in centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.-Fl.
II, V, the fuU season not known.
205.
Mimosa scabrella Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 387.
1841.-"Brasilia, Sello."
-Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1846; isotypi, Sello 4450, ^B = F Neg. 1370, Sello s.n.,
BM! NY! P! W! M. bracaatinga Hoehne, A Bracaatinga ou Abaracaatinga [Publ. Seer.
Agric.
Industr.
Comm.
Sao Paulo] 23, fig. p. 29 (fl).
1930.-"No.
23096 [fr] cultivada na Granja do Canguery, en Curytiba, em 19-10-28; no. 24575 [fr], mandado pelo Sr. Antonio Martins Franco, de Curytiba, em 29-10-29, e no. 25021 ramos.. . cultivados no Horto da Cantareira.. . colhidos por n6s em 16-1-30 [sterile]."—No typus seen, the interpretation traditional, following Burkart and Lins, U.cc. infra. M. bracaatinga var. aspericarpa Hoehne, op. cit.
28, fig. p. 29 (right).
1930.-No. 23493 [fr]... das visinhan^as de Boa Esperanga, a beira do Caminho para o Rio das Mortes, em 8-11-28.—Typus not seen; equated with M. scabrella by Lins, 1984: 45.
M. bracaatinga fma paucijuga Hoehne, op. cit.
27, fig. p. 25, in discussion, nom. provis.
M. securuia Hoehne ex Angely, Fl. descript.
Parana 2: 660.
1977, nom. nud. in syn. M. scabrella sensu Bentham, 1875: 410, 1876: 350 (exclus.
Burchell 7713 e Goias); Burkart, 1948: 224, 1964: 409 (antecedent bibUography), 1979: 179-185, est. 27-29 + map (Sta. Catarina); Lins, 1984: 44, fig. 7 + map (Rio Grande do Sul); Morim de Lima, 1985, photo 17 (pod).
M. verrucosa sensu Glaziou, 1906:181, ex parte (5657).
Unarmed trees of rapid growth, attaining 20 m or sometimes more with trunk to 4 dm diam. and broad low-convex crown of foliage, the brittle reddish-brown annotinous branchlets, lf-stks and peduncles scabrous with erect, densely plumulose setulae 0.1-0.4(-0.5) mm sometimes mostly contracted into lepidote stellae, the dense but variably ample foliage decisively or weakly bicolored, the lfts gray-stellate beneath, usually less densely so or rarely subglabrous above, the usually numerous globose or shortly oblong-ellipsoid capitula for the most part axillary but at times some distal ones shortly pseudoracemose, the long-persistent fruits immersed in foliage and often retained on annotinous defoliate branchlets.
Stipules lanceolate or linear 2.5-7 x 0.5- 1.3 mm, caducous usually before maturity of associated If.
Leaf-stalks mostly 3.5-9 cm, of some small early and few depauperate distal lvs shorter (no further described), the petiole 1.5-4 cm, at middle 0.5-1.1 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 5-13(-20) mm; pinnae of lvs on flowering branches 3-8(-9)-, on some vigorous nonflowering shoots to 14-jug., usually a little accrescent distally, the axis of longer ones 3-8(-9) cm, their longer interfoliolar segments l-3.3(-4) mm; lfts of distal pinnae (12-) 15-32-jug., decrescent only at very ends of rachis, the first pair (0.1-)0.3-0.8 mm distant from subulate or narrowly ovate paraphyUidia 0.5-1.2 mm, the blades narrowly oblong or oblong-elUptic obtuse from semicordate or obtusangulate base, those near mid-rachis usually 3.5-9 x 1.2-2.7 mm, on Mt. Itatiaia in Rio de Janeiro attaining 12-14 x 4 mm, in either case 2.7-3.9 times as long as wide, the venation of smaller lfts concealed by gray indumentum, the subcentric costa of ampler ones and sometimes a short posterior nerve weakly raised beneath.
Peduncles solitary or mostly 2- 3-nate, 6-20 mm; capitula without filaments 5- 12 X (4.5-)5-8mm, 1-1.5 times as long as diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the densely creamyor yellowish-silky-strigulose, obovoid fl-buds surpassing the oblong-oblanceolate obtuse or apiculate bracts, these 0.7-1.8 mm, dorsally tomentulose distally, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, a few random ones (not seen) reportedly 5-androus, some proximal ones staminate; calyx membranous campanulate 0.4-0.8 mm, glabrous extemally, the truncate or broadly low-denticulate orifice minutely ciliolate; corollas 2.2-2.9 mm, the firm ovate concave lobes 0.7-1.3 X 0.7-0.9 mm; filaments sulfur-yellow, monadelphous with intervening subulate staminodia into a cup 0.7-1.3 mm enveloping the puberulent ovary, exserted 3.5-4.5 mm.
Pods usually several per capitulum, sessile, in profile broad-linear, abruptly apiculate, 15-42 x (5-)6- 8(-9) mm, the replum 0.5-0.8 mm wide, obscurely or not at all constricted between seeds, the epidermis of stiflly papery low-convex valves concealed by a coat of contracted verruciform or stelliform brownish setulae, when ripe breaking into individually dehiscent articles 5-7 mm long; seeds (described by Boelke, Darwiniana 7(2): 255, in clave.
1946, sub M. bracaatinga) 4.2-6.4 x 3.7-4.6 mm, the testa black, the cotyledons green.
A characteristic tree of distvubed woodland and Araucaria forest in the mountains and campos of extratropical s.-e. Brazil n.-ward from centr. Rio Grande do Sul, in places forming a closed woodland called bracaatingal, extending only weakly across the Tropic of Capricorn, at 700- 1900 m, along Sa. do Mar into the e. lobe of S. Paulo (Cunha) and along Sa. da Mantiqueira to Mt. Itatiaia in w. Rio de Janeiro; cultivated in BrasUia and doubtless elsewhere in tropical Brazil; widely planted for ornament, fuel, pulp and charcoal in Central and n. S. America and in the Old World tropics.-n. in Brazil (VII-)VIII-I(- III), perhaps intermittently later.—Bracaatinga; abaracaatinga; paracaatinga.
The morphology, dispersal and economic virtues of M. scabrella have been most fully described by Burkart and by Lins in the places cited above.
A curious form under cultivation in Parana (mun. Bocaiva do Sul, Moreira & A. Miguel s.n.,
NY) has pod-valves grossly verrucose as well as stellate.
Burkart (1948: 225) plausibly suggested that the type-locality of M. scabrella is near Lages in Sta. Catarina, where Sello must have encountered it on his fifth voyage.
206.
Mimosa eriocarpa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 387.
1841.-"BrazU, ^S^/Za"-Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)!; presumed isotypi, Sello d.l427, -^B = F Neg. 13151 F (fragm ex B)! Sello s.n.,
G! K (hb. Hook.)! ISTY! W! M. eriocarpa sensu Bentham, 1875: 410, t. 66, 1876: 351; Burkart, 1964: 413; Lins, 1984; 30, fig. 3 + map.
Slender, much branched shrubs attaining 3 m, with defoliate and glabrate annotinous and older stems and densely leafy homotinous ones, the latter like the If-axes tomentulose with slender erect plumose setae to ± 1 mm, the brownish lvs bicolored, the lfts dark dull brown and subglabrous above, a little paler and either stellate or shortly plumose-setulose beneath, the stellae subcontiguous especially on anterior side of midrib but not concealing hypophyllum, the small subglobose capitula solitary or 2-3 together in distal If-axils, early immersed in foliage.
Stipules linear-subulate 1.5-4 mm, stellate dorsally, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 2-3.5(-4) cm, the petiole 2- 12 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 2-8 mm; pinnae 3-6(-8)-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 12-24 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.2 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 12-18-jug., a little decrescent at both ends of rachis, the first pair 0.2-0.6 mm distant from small subulate paraphyllidia, the blades oblongelUptic from bluntly auriculate base, obtuse at apex, the larger ones 2.5-3.5 x 1-1.8 mm, the venation on both faces fully immersed.
Peduncles 8-18 mm; capitula ovoid, without filaments ± 4 x 3 mm, the receptacle in fmit to 4 mm; bracts lance-ovate 1-1.8 mm, steUately lepidote dorsally, persistent;flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx not seen entire; corolla (seen only in mdimentary condition) campanulate ±1.5 mm, cleft to middle, densely stellate extemally, yeUow within; filaments monadelphous at base and altemating with rudimentary staminodia less than 1 mm.
Pods several per capitulum, sessile, plumply obovoid-subglobose, bereft of vesture 5-6 X 3 mm, the replum 0.45-0.6 mm wide, the papery-crustaceous valves concealed by a dense fleece of pinkish plumose setae to 1-2.5 mm, the whole resembling a cottony gall 5-9 x 5-7.5 mm, the cavity continuous, 1-seeded; seeds scarcely 2 mm long. Rocky stream-banks and low moist places in extratropical campo, known only from centr. and n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU.-Fl.
VII-IX. Detached flowering branchlets of M. eriocarpa suggest a diminutive or starveling M. scabrella, of which the leaf-formula is sometimes similar.
The mature plant, however is a slender shrub, never arborescent; the capitula, commonly subtended by one or more rows of empty bracts, are fewer-flowered and narrower, and the one-seeded pods concealed in a dense mantle of plumose setae, suggesting pinkish insect-gaUs when fresh, are perfectly characteristic.
207.
Mimosa taimbensis Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 362, fig. 2.
1964.-"Rio Grande do Sul: Sao Francisco de Paula, Taimbe, leg .
.
.
A. Sehnem 5140, 18.
XII.1950 (typus speciei).
.
. ."—Holotypus, SI (not seen); paratypi.
Smith & Klein 7749, NY! US!; Smith & Reitz 14239, NY! US! M. taimbensis sensu Burkart, 1979: 166 + map (Sta. Catarina), est. 23; Lins, 1984: 50 + map (Rio Grande do Sul),fig.8.
M. tacimbensis (sphalm.) Gray Index, issue 248.
Unarmed microphyUidious arborescent shrubs 1-5 m with reddish-brown glabrate defoliate annotinous branches and densely leafy homotinous branchlets sordidly tomentulose with shorter stelliform and longer plumulose setulae to 0.15- 0.4 mm, the lvs notably bicolored, the small firm lfts (dry) lustrous dark-olivaceous and glabrous or almost so above, beneath white-stellate-tomentulose, the narrow amentiform capitula axUlary to distal lvs, immersed in foUage.
Stipules erect setiform 1.5-4.5 mm, persistent but becoming dry and fragile.
Leaf-stalks 6-18 mm, the petiole including firm pulvinus 4-10 x 0.4- 0.6 mm, the interpinnal segments (0.5-) 1.5-4 mm; pinnae (1-)2-4-jug., in some plants mostly 2-jug., subaccrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 20-36 mm, the interfoUolar segments ± as long as base of lfts; lfts of longer pinnae 11- 24-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the blades ovate-oblong or obtusely triangular fi"om obUquely truncate or shaUowly cordate base, obtuse at apex, the larger ones 3-5 x 1.5-2.4 mm, about half as wide as long, all low-convex above and concave beneath, essentially nerveless extemally, the margin a little thickened but scarcely callous-marginate.
Peduncles solitary or geminate, not over 1 cm; capitula loosely spiciform, without filaments narrowly oblong in profile, 5-10 X 3-4.5 mm, the fls ascending; bracts ovate 0.8-1.2 mm, persistent; yZow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus; calyx campanulate 0.6-1 mm, thinly setulose-stellate overall or glabrescent toward base, the teeth either depressed-deltate or subobsolete; corolla campanulate 1.8-2 mm, densely steUate-tomentulose extemaUy, yeUow within, the broadly ovate lobes ±0.8 x 0.6-0.7 mm; filaments yeUow, monadelphous at very base, exserted ±2-2.8 mm; ovary pilosulous.
Pods often several per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblongeUiptic, cuneately contracted at each end, 7-19 X 3-4.5 mm, (1-)2-3-seeded, the slender replum and firmly papery valves alike densely or at length thinly yellowish-stellate overall, the valves lowumbonate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, oblong-elUptic articles 5-7 mm long; seeds obliquely descending, in profile obovate ± 5 x 3 mm, the testa smooth black.
On precipitous rocky summits (taimbes) and at edge of rocky campos, sometimes forming thickets, endemic in the zone of cloud-forest at ±1000-2000 m to Sa.
Geral in lat. 27°30- 29°30'S, in s.-e. Sta. Catarina and adj. n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU.-R. VII-IX. Two to four pairs of pinnae per leaf, small bicolored leaflets lustrous on upper face, and narrowly oblong capitula are the principal discriminatory features of M. taimbensis.
Sympatric Calothamnos may be distinguished by leaves either conjugately pinnate or if plurijugate then larger and subconcolorous, and always by globose capitula.
208.
Mimosa lepidorepens Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 365, fig. 3.
196^.-''Brasilia australiore: Santa Catharina in montibus apricis . .. Morro do Iquererim, Campo Alegre, altit.
1.000 m .. . leg. Reitz et Klein 5259."-Holotypus, SI (not seen).
Procumbent, randomly radicant shrublets, the young stems rusty-tomentose with plumose setae to 1.5 mm, glabrate fuscous in age, the lfts bicolored, above lustrous glabrous, beneath finely stellate and also, as well as on margins, plumosely hispid with longer apically glabrate setae, the oblong-ellipsoid capitula solitary in distal Ifaxils.
Leaf-stalks 1.5-4 cm, the petiole only slightly longer than the interpinnal segments; pinnae 4-6-jug., accrescent distally, the distal pairs attaining 2.5 cm; lfts of longer pinnae to 18-jug., obliquely oblong obtuse from bluntly short-auriculate base, shallowly cancave dorsally, 2-4 X 1-1.6 mm, 1-nerved, the nerve subcentric, dorsally prominulous.
Peduncles 2-3.5 cm; capitula unknown at anthesis; bracts Unearoblong 1.5-2 mm, persistent; flowers with calyx described as ±0.5 mm, the truncate rim ciliolate; corolla to 2 mm, stellately lepidote extemally; filaments of unknown color, shortly monadelphous at base, staminodia vestigial or 0.
Pods sessile, in profile linear-elliptic acute, 15-20 x 5-6 mm, 2- or more-seeded, the valves densely rusty-hispid with slender plumulose, forwardly curved setae 0.5-2 mm.
In unreported habitat, but to be expected in stony campo or on outcrops in the moist temperate zone at or above 900 m, known only from the type-locality on Morro do Iquererim in mun. Campo Alegre, near lat. 26°10'S in extreme n.- e. Sta. Catarina, BrazU.-R. ?; fr.
X-XI. The foregoing description is compiled from the protologue and the account in Flora ilustrada catarinense.
The species apparently combines the dwarf procumbent growth-form of M involucrata and M. rocae with the plurijugate leaves of, e.g., M. eriocarpa in a distinctive syndrome.
209.
Mimosa bathyrrhena Bameby, sp. nov., M. furfuraceae forsan magis affinis, ab ea capituUs abbreviatis (nec julaceis), flosculis infra lobulorum apicem stellatim pilosulum retrostrigulosis (nec ubique stellato-tomentellis) necnon legumine vellere e setisflexilibusplumosis basi albis apicem versus auratis constanti densissime comoso diversa.—Brazil.
Parana: Mun.
Ponta Grossa, Passo do Pupo, 8.
IX.1867, G. Hatschbach /77^i.-Holotypus, MBM 4033; isotypi, HBG, MO, NY, RB, US 2536512.
Unarmed shrubs ±2 m, the young branches, If-axes and peduncles densely softly pilose with sordid or lutescent plumose setae to 0.7-1 mm, the dull-olivaceous foliage subconcolorous, the lfts charged on both faces with stalked stelliform setae 0.2-0.3 mm tall, the ovoid or subglobose capitula solitary or 2-3 together in axil of coevally expanding lvs, the amorphous cocoon-Uke pods immersed in foliage.
Stipules caducous, those of primary lvs not seen, those of axiUary spurs triangular-lanceolate 4-6 mm, dorsally stellate-lanate.
Leaf-stalks (3-)4-7 cm, the petiole ±2-4 cm, at middle 0.55-1 mm diam., the one interpinnal segment 1-3 cm; pinnae so far as known exactly 2-jug., the distal pair longer, their rachis 5-11 cm and the longer interfoliolar segments 4- 7 mm; lfts of distal pinnae (9-) 10-16-jug., decrescent proximaUy and upward subequUong, the unequal first pair 2-3.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 1-1.5 mm, the blades obliquely ovate-oblong from semicordate base, deltateapiculate at apex, those near mid-rachis 8-16.5 X 3.5-6 mm, 2.3-2.8 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the slender, scarcely excentric midrib weakly 1-2-branched beyond middle, the inner (or only) posterior nerve expiring near or short of mid-blade, the outer posterior one very short or obsolete.
Peduncles ±2-3.5 cm; capitula not seen at anthesis but calculated from fl-size ±6 mm diam. without filaments, the receptacle 4-5 mm long; bracts (few seen) linear-oblanceolate ±3-3.5 X 0.4-0.6 mm, tomentulose on both faces from middle upward, caducous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, apparently all bisexual; calyx membranous shaUow-campanulate ±0.3 mm, the undulately truncate rim minutely ciliolate; corolla turbinate 2.5 mm, the lanceolate concave lobes ±1.3 X 0.6 mm, the tube retrostrigulose with simple hairs, the tip of lobes yellowish-stellate; filaments yellow when dry, monadelphous through ±0.5 mm and altemating with staminodia free for ±0.4 mm, exserted 2.5 mm.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) several per capitulum, sessile, in profile (disregarding vesture) ±1.5-3 x 0.6 cm, the shallowly constricted replum and the almost plane thin-textured valves alike concealed by a dense fleece of slender pliant plumose setae to 5 mm, these whitish at base and lutescent distally; dehiscence not seen (but probably craspedial).
On stream-bank near 1000 m, on sandstone substrate, known only from Sa. das Almas e. of Ponta Grossa, ±25°10'S, 50°W in e.-centr. Parana, BrazU.-Fl. (?-)VII. Mimosa bathyrrhena, despite its capitate rather than spicate inflorescence, is similar to M. furfuracea, from which it differs in corollas stellate only distally and otherwise retrostrigulose, and in the long dense wool, consisting of slender plumose setae, that cloaks the pod.
210.
Mimosa bonplandii (Hooker & Amott) Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 387.
1841, based on Acacia bonplandii Gillies ex Hooker & Arnott, Bot. Misc.
3: 205.
1832.—"Bonpland's Garden, Buenos Ayres, Dr. Gillies.
Within the tidemark, on the shores of La Plata, Tweedie."
Syntypi, K (hb. Hook.)!; isosyntypi, E! [Non M. bonplandii Tenore, Cat. Orto bot. NapoU77.
1845].
Acacia lepidota Hooker & Amott, Bot. Misc.
3: 205.
1832.-"Uruguay, Baird."
— Yiolotypus, K (hb. Yioo\i.)\—Mimosa bonplandii var. minor Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 387.
1841.
M. bonplandii ^ Bentham, 1876: 349.
Mimosa bonplandii sensu Bentham, 1875: 410, 1876: 349; Burkart, 1948: 120 (antecedent bibliography), fig. 17B, lam XII (left, ex parte), 1964: 408; Cabrera, Man. fl. aired.
Buenos Aires 245, fig. 81.
1953; Burkart, 1967: 442, fig. 137, 1987: 497, fig. 221 (optima!).
Unarmed, slenderly much branched, broadcrowned shrub or treelet 1-3 m, the annotinous and older defoUate branches dark reddish-brown, the young branchlets and lf-stks lepidote with contracted multiradiate steUiform setulae, the duU olivaceous subconcolorous lfts glabrous above, either glabrate or thinly weakly stellate beneath, the small globose or plumply ovoid capitula fasciculate in axil of coeval lvs, the fruits matvuing on defoliate branchlets below the foliage.
Stipules triangular-subulate or linear-attenuate l-A x 0.4- 1 mm, 1-nerved, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks of primary lvs on flowerless stems ±2-4.5(-5.5) cm, of smaller simpler lvs associated wth fls ±1-2 cm, the petiole including hard insensitive pulvinus 5-11 X 0.3-0.6 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 2-9 mm, the shallow ventral sulcus bridged between pinnae but spicules 0; pinnae of lvs coeval with fls (1-)2-4-, of some larger primary lvs' to 7(-9)-jug., the rachis of longer ones mostly 10-23 mm, of primary lvs to 40(-45) mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.6 mm; lfts of distal pinnae (9-)l 1-24-jug., scarcely graduated, the blades oblong to narrowly oblongobovate or Unear-oblong from obliquely tmncate base, obscurely mucronulate at apex, the longer ones2.5-5.5(-7) x 0.8-2(-2.2) mm, 2.6-3.4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath weakly 1 -nerved by scarcely excentric, immersed but discolored midrib.
Peduncles (1-)2-5(-6) per axU, 2.5-11 mm; capitula without filaments (3.5-)4- 5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds densely steUate, the receptacle 1.5- 4 mm; bracts ovate-elliptic or lanceolate 0.7-1.2 mm, 1-nerved, glabrous or thinly stellate dorsally, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, most or all bisexual; calyx shallowly cup-shaped 0.4-0.5 X 0.7-0.9 mm, glabrous extemally, the depressed-deltate, often unequal teeth minutely ciliolate; corolla campanulate 2-2.6 mm, the erect, shallowly concave ovate lobes 0.7-0.9 x 0.8-1 mm; filaments pale yellow, monadelphous through 0.8-1 mm and altemating with minute subulate staminodia, exserted 2-3 mm.
Pods commonly 2-5 per capitulum, sessile but cuneate-attenuate at each end, in profile linear-moniliform, gently decurved, 10-36 x 4-5 mm, (1-)2-5(-6)-seeded, the deeply constricted replum 0.45-0.7 mm wide, the papery valves convexly dilated over each seed, the replum and valves aUke densely pallid-stellate overall, the ripe valves breaking up into elliptic free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 4.5-7 mm long; seeds plumply obovoid, scarcely compressed, ±4.5 X 3.5-4 X 3.5 mm, the testa smooth, brown or dark brown, the embryo suspended in transparent endosperm between two air-cavities, the whole seed water-borne.
On beaches and riverbanks inundated at high tide, locally plentiful and sometimes forming thickets, below 25 m, common in the Parana estuary and on the s. shore of rio de la Plata as far e. as Magdalena, prov. Buenos Aires, Argentina, of old reported from the banks of lower Uruguai in Uruguay and collected recently upstream near Paso de los Libres in prov. Corrientes, Argentina, to be sought on the left bank of the Uruguai in extreme s.-w. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.—Fl.
VII-XII, the fruit persisting into IIII.
Nothing of substance can be added to the discursive accounts of M. bonplandii provided by Burkart (U.cc.), who first described the riparian ecology of the species and its buoyant seeds.
The only member of sect. Calothamnos that shares the habitat and, in part, the range of M. bonplandii is M. pilulifera, readily distinguished by unijugate pinnae of all leaves and by filaments free to the base, without intervening staminodia.
211.
Mimosa urticaria Bameby, sp. nov., habitu toto foUoUsque majusculis tenuibus concoloribus M. bathyrrhenam simulans, ab ea setis caulinis brevioribus ±0.4 (nec 0.7-1) mm longis, petiolis communibus 2-3 (nec 4-7) cm longis, pinnis 1 (nec 2)-jugis, pedunculis 0.6-2 (nec 2-3.5) cm longis, bracteis angustissimis 1-1.5 (nec 3-3.5) mm longis, corolUs ipso a basi stellatis (nec infra medium retrostrigulosis) necnon staminodiis inter filamenta fertilia nullis distans.—Brazil.
Parana: Mun.
Ortigueira, Bairro dos Franca, 6.
XII.1965 (fl), G. Hatschbach (with H. Haas & J. Lindeman) 7i2i0.-Holotypus, MBM 828; isotypi, C, F, M, NY, P, US. Fig.
16.
M. parasordida Burkart in sched. (M), nom. nud. Amply leafy unarmed shrubs ± 3 m, the hornotinous stems, lf-stks and axes of pyramidally branched inflorescence tomentellous with erect plumose setulae to 0.4(-0.5) mm, the thin-textured lvs (dry) dull brownish-olivaceous concolorous, the lfts finely stellate on both faces, the plumply ellipsoid capitula exserted from foliage but most peduncles subtended by hysteranthous lvs.
Stipules erect, linear-ligulate or -attenuate (5-)6-8 X 1 mm, tomentellous on both faces, 1-nerved dorsally, subpersistent.
Leaf-stalks 2- 3 cm, 0.5-0.7 mm diam.; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (4.5-)5-7 cm, the interfoliolar segments 3- 4 mm; lfts 14-19-jug., subequilong, the first pair 1.2-2 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.6-1.5 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from obtusangulate base, deltate-apiculate, the larger ones 9.5-14.5 x 2.6-4 mm, 3.2-3.8 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath finely 4-nerved from pulvinule, the moderately displaced midrib prominulous proximally, faint distally, the inner posterior nerve expiring short of mid-blade, the one anterior and the outer posterior nerve very short or subobsolescent.
Peduncles solitary and 2-3-nate, 6-20 mm; capitula without filaments 7-10 x 5-5.5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform; bracts sublinear 1.1-1.5 x 0.15 mm, puberulent distally, caducous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, the lower ones staminate and a little smaller than distal ones; calyx reduced to a shallow membranous collar ±0.15 mm, the rim obscurely lobulate and ciliolate; corolla narrowly turbinate 2.1-2.5 mm, densely creamy-stellate overall, the cymbiform, scarcely thickened lobes 0.6-0.7 x 0.6-0.7 mm; filaments .vj V."'"V' " 3, , A' ^ 3 mm.
FIG. view + 16.
Mimosa urticaria Bameby.
A. Rowering branch.
B. Segment of stem + stipules.
C. Leaflet, ventral enlarged trichomes.
D. Bract +flower.(All from Hatschbach 13230.) yeUow, at base monadelphous through ±0.7 mm, without intervening staminodia, exserted 3-4 mm; ovary puberulent; pod unknown.
In capoeira at unrecorded elevation, known only from the municipio of Ortigueira (bairros dos Machados and dos Franga), near 24°15'S, 5PW in centr. Parana.-H. XII-I(-?).
Mimosa urticaria (the epithet alludes to the type-locality) appears well characterized by conjugate pinnae bome on a relatively long petiole, expansive thin-textured concolorous leaflets thinly stellate on each face, corollas stellate from base upward, and lack of staminodia between the monadelphous fertile stamens.
In general aspect it recalls M. bathyrrhena, also endemic (so far as known) to upland Parana, but this is clearly different in bijugate pinnae, longer pinnae and floral bracts, and staminodia between the filaments.
The common M. pilulifera var. pseudincana has one pair of pinnae like M. urticaria, but petioles only 1-4 mm long and strongly bicolored leaflets scarcely half as big.
212.
Mimosa daleoides Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 389.
1841.-"BrazU, Sello; Prov. St. Paul [Riedel commun.] Langsdorff."
—Lectotypus (Lins, 1984: 25), Sello s.n.,
K (herb.
Benth.)!; isotypi, G! K (herb.
Hook.)!; syntypus, Langsdorff ex herb, petrop.
169, K (herb.
Benth.)! M. daleoides fma paraguariensis Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 554 [=P1. hassler.
2: 410].
1904.—"[Paraguay:] pr. Curuguaty, Sept. [Hassler] n. 4584; ... pr. Chololo, in valle fluminis Y-aca, Dec. [Hassler] n. 6601."—Syntypi, G!; isosyntypi, A! NY! W\—M. daleoides var. paraguariensis (Chodat & Hassler) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 1.
1910.—Reduced to typical M. daleoides by Burkart, 1964: 361.
M. daleoides fma psammophila Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 361.
1964.-"BrasU.
Rio Grande do Sul: Osorio (nordeste maritime del estado). .. B. Rambo 45.188, en flor 4-1-1950 "-Holotypus, SI, not seen.—Lins (1984: 25, in discussion) included this in M. daleoides and cited an isotypus at PACA.
M. daleoides sensu Bentham, 1875: 411, 1876: 353, Burkart, 1948: 118, fig. 16D, 1964: 359; Lins, 1984: 24, fig. 2 + map (Rio Grande do Sul).
Slender unarmed shrubs and subshrubs, with either ascending or diffiise (then exceptionally subradicant), distally forking or simple, relatively distant-lvd stems, tomentellous throughout with contracted stelliform and (upward, especially on peduncles and lf-stks) fine erect yellowish plumose setulae to 0.2-0.4(-0.6) mm, the foliage yellowish-green concolorous, the thick-textured lfts stellate-tomentulose on both faces, the narrowly amentiform or slenderly ellipsoid fl-spikes solitary or 2-3(-4)-nate in several or many successive If-axils along all terminal branchlets, or late in season forming a shortly exserted pseudoraceme.
Stipules erect, Unear-attenuate (2-)3- 7 mm, tomentulose dorsally like stem, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including hard pulvinus 2-6(-9) x 0.4-0.8 mm, the ventral sulcus concealed by pubescence; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of each 1.5- 5.5(-6) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (1.2-)1.4-2(-3.4) mm; lfts of aU but rare diminished rameal lvs 1 l-21(-25)-jug., altemate along rachis, the first pair 0.8-1.6 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.5 mm, only a little decrescent at ends of rachis, the plane blades oblong or oblong-elUptic from obtusangulate base. obtuse or subapiculate, those near mid-rachis (2-)3-8.5 X 1.5-2.8 mm, (2-)2.2-3.4 times as long as wide, the slightly displaced midrib and sometimes one posterior nerve faintly raised beneath, the venation otherwise immersed.
Peduncles (0.6-) 1.5-5 cm; flower-spikes cylindric or (when short) narrowly ellipsoid-ovoid, without filaments 3-4.5 mm diam., the axis (4-)5-16(-25) mm; bracts linear-oblanceolate or spatulate 0.8- 2 mm, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, subuniform in size but those below mid-axis all or mostly staminate; calyx reduced to a minute ciliolate disc ±0.2 mm diam.; corollas subglobose 1.4-1.8 mm, densely yellowish-stellate extemally, the connivent deltate-triangular lobes 0.5-0.7 mm; filaments yellow, monadelphous through 0.5-0.8 mm into a cup bearing between each pair a rudimentary staminode less than 0.1 mm, the fertile ones exserted 1.6-2.3 mm; ovary tomentulose.
Pods usually numerous along distal half of receptacle, sessile by cuneate base, in profile undulately Unear-oblong 8-17(-24) x 2-3 mm, 2-5(-6)-seeded, densely subuniformly yellowishor sordid-stellate overall, the constricted replum 0.3-0.45 mm wide, the firmly papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into oblong-elUptic, individually dehiscent articles 3-5 mm long; seeds basipetally descending, plumply obovoid ±2-2.5 x 1.5 mm, the testa fuscous duU.
In seasonally dry campo and in pasture thickets, ascending from near sea-level s.-ward to 1050 m in mountainous e. Parana and to 1600 m in s.-e. Bolivia, interruptedly widespread in s.-e. Brazil from e. Rio Grande do Sul n. to and perhaps just beyond the Tropic of Capricorn in S. Paulo, w. just into Misiones and Corrientes, Argentina, thence n.-w. through Paraguay into s.- e. Bolivia (Sta. Cruz), and n. just into s.-most Mato Grosso do Sul (rio Iguatemi).—Fl. freely XII-IV, intermittently thereafter, the pods (or empty repla) often persisting on annotinous stems.
This common and well-known species has recently been treated in detail by Burkart and by Lins.
It is readily recognized among Calothamnos with conjugately pinnate leaves by yellowishgreen coloration of the relatively sparse foliage, by narrow, often amentiform capitula, by basally connate filaments, and by narrow, uniformly stellate pod shallowly constricted between seeds.
213.
Mimosa pilulifera Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 386.
1841.—Typus infra sub var. pilulifera indicatur.
Unarmed, potentially arborescent shrubs with broad crown of freely forking pliant, in age glabrescent branches, attaining 3-5 m, the young growth canescently or sordidly tomentulose with short plumulose setulae to 0.2-0.4 mm or with essentially sessile stellae, the olivaceous lfts either concolorous or markedly discolorous, either finely stellate or glabrous above, beneath either thinly stellulate (especially on side anterior to midrib) or pallidly, even canescently stellate-tomentulose overall, the numerous globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula of yellowish fls pedunculate in many distal If-axils, the canescently or sordidly stellate pods mostly on defoliate branchlets below current lvs.
Stipules erect, linear-subulate (1-)1.5-4.5(-5) X 0.2-0.8 mm, either deciduous or persistent through life of If.
Leaf-stalks including firm pulvinus (1-)1.5- 7(-10) mm (of some reduced lvs sometimes obsolete, no further described), near middle 0.4- 0.8 mm diam., the ventral sulcus narrow, spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones (1-)2- 6 (in fma calvescens to "9") cm, the interfoliolar segments (0.4-)0.5-2(-2.2) mm; lfts (12-)14-31-, in some early cauline lvs to 36-jug., a little decrescent toward each end of rachis, the first pair 1 mm or less distant from subulate or minute setiform paraphyllidia, the blades narrowly oblong from obtusangulate or semicordate base, either obtuse or apiculate, the longer ones 2.5- 8(-l 1) X 0.6-2.5(-2.8) mm, ±3-4 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath weakly 1- 2-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib a little forwardly displaced, the posterior nerve, when perceptible, expiring near or short of mid-blade.
Peduncles 1-3 per If-axil, (5-)6-23 mm; capitula without filaments 2-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the subglobose fl-buds canescently or sordidly stellulate overall; bracts narrowly spatulate or sometimes elliptic-ovate 0.6- 1.7 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, most or aU bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.2- 0.6 mm, the tube glabrous, the subtmncate rim minutely cUiolate; coroUa turbinate-obovoid 1.2- 2.8 mm, the triangular-ovate lobes 0.5-0.8 mm, ± as wide; filaments yellowish, free to base, exserted 1-2.5 mm.
Pods mostly l^(-5) per capitulum, sessile or almost so, in profile from elliptic 1-seeded to undulately linear, straight or subdecurved and 3-8-seeded, (8-) 12-45(-50) x (2.5-)3.5-7.5 mm, the very shallowly constricted replum 0.3-0.8 mm wide, the stiffly papery valves low-umbonulate over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely scabrous-stellulate overall or the replum a little less densely so, the ripe valves breaking up into individually dehiscent articles 3.5-6.5(-7) mm long; seeds compressedobovoid ±3-4.5 X 2-3 mm, the testa brown or fuscous-olivaceous, dull.
Following the lead of Lins (1984: 40) I here retum to Bentham's inclusive concept of a M. pilulifera variable in pubescence, flower-size and width of pod that is dispersed from central Minas Gerais south to Umguay and adjoining Argentina.
Burkart divided the corresponding material into a narrowly defined, southern riparian lowland M. pilulifera sens, restr. and a mostly montane-campestrian M. pseudincana dispersed along the Atlantic uplands from Rio Grande do Sul to central Minas Gerais; he emphasized principally habitat and denser indumentum as specific criteria of the latter.
Lins, however, found no significant pattem of differences, and reduced Burkart's M. pilulifera and M. pseudincana, together with the minor segregates M. aparadensis and M. simulans, to one polymorphic taxon.
Study of this problem led me independently to a middle ground.
All specimens of the complex seen from Sta. Catarina northward plainly differ from the riparian plant of the lower Parana River and Plate Estuary in smaller capitula, denser dorsal indumentum of the leaflets, and a pod averaging a little narrower.
In Rio Grande do Sul specimens ambiguous in one or other respect become frequent, but it seems realistic and desirable, in spite of these, to maintain two varieties.
Burkart's less significant segregates are mentioned further under var. pseudincana.
Lins's description of the "semente .
.
.
11 [ x ] 6 mm" must refer to the articles of the pod, not to the seed itself.
Key to varieties of M. pilulifera 1.
Capitula withoutfilaments2-4.5(-5) mm diam. and the individual fls 1.2-1.8(-2) mm; hypophyllum of lfts tomentulose overall (exceptionally glabrescent on side posterior to midrib— transitional to the next); pod (2.5-)3.5-5.5 mm wide; centr. Minas Gerais to Rio Grande do Sul. 213a. var. pseudincana (p. 340).
1.
Capitula without filaments 4.5-6 mm diam. and individual fls (2-)2.2-2.8 mm; hypophyllum of Uts thinly stellate or glabrescent; pod 5-7.5 mm wide; n.-e. Argentina, Uruguay, adj. Rio Grande do Sul 213b. var. pilulifera (p. 340).
213a. Mimosa pilulifera Bentham var. pseudincana (Burkart) Bameby, comb, nov., based on autonym generated by M. pseudincana var. discolor Burkart, I.e. infra. M. pseudincana Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 397, fig. 8(a-l).
1964.—"Rio Grande do Sul: Municipio de Nononai, cerca de Irao .
.
.
L. Baptista, flor. VII.1962 (Herb. A. R. Schultz 3195 .
.
. ) . "
- Holotypus, ICN (not seen); isotypus, SI (not seen); paratypi, Handro 794, Claussen 818, Smith & Klein 8165, Reitz & Klein 15096, aU NY and several alibi! M. pilulifera var. discolor Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2- 4): 401, fig. 8 m, n. 1964.-"Parana: Curytiba, rio Barigui .
.
. flor. 27.
VII.1944; fmtos el 14.
XI.1948, leg. Gert Hatschbach 113."—Syntypi, SI (not seen); isosyntypus, M!; paratypi, Dusen 12008, NY! S! M. aparadensis Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 394, fig. 7.
1964.—""Brasilia australis, Rio Grande do Sul in montibuspraeruptis Aparados dictis.
Typus: B. Rambo 32.414 "-Holotypus, collected 29.11.46 (fl, fr), SI (not seen); paratypus, Rambo 45485 e loc. typ.,
NY!—Reduced to M. pilulifera sensu lato by Lins, 1984: 40.
M. simulans Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 402,fig.9.
1964.—"Brasil, Rio Grande do Sul. Typus: Montenegro, Aloysio Sehnem 5044."—Holotypus, SI (not seen).—Equated with M. pilulifera sensu lato by Lins, 1984: 40.
M. pilulifera sensu Bentham, 1876: 438, ex parte (pi. Claussen.,
Pohl.,
Riedel.
!), exclus. syn.; Lins, 1984, majori ex parte.
M. aparadensis sensu Burkart, 1979: 172 + map, est. 24.
M. pseudincana sensu Burkart, 1979: 174 + map (Sta. Catarina), est. 25 C'pseudoincana^').
M. simulans sensu Burkart, 1979: 177 + map, est. 26.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
On streamand river-banks, in moist thickets, at margin of gallery woodland, sometimes forming dominant populations, discontinuously widespread along the coast ranges of s.-e. Brazil, from the headwaters of rio Grande in Minas Gerais s.-w. to n.-e. (perhaps centr.) Rio Grande do Sul, according to Burkart (I.e.) to Umguay, in S. Paulo ascending to 1770 m on Sa. da Bocaina, n.-ward from Parana not or seldom below 700 m but perhaps lower s.-ward.—Fl. in tropical latitudes mostly III-V, s.-ward IV-VIII, but intermittently at other seasons.
Among the synonyms listed under var. pseudincana, the var. discolor is the least substantial variant, a form with leaflets glabrous and lustrous (not thinly stellate) on the upper face; it is the predominant form in eastem Parana and extends thence both north and southward, but nowhere displaces completely the typical form.
Mimosa aparadensis has the small capitula of var. pseudincana, but leaflets glabrous dorsally on the posterior side of midrib, where covered in sleep by the leaflet next below it on the rachis, and is in this respect intermediate to var. pilulifera.
The concentration of leaves toward the end of the branches, said by Burkart to be distinctive, is matched in specimens with the indumentum of var. pseudincana.
Mimosa simulans, known to me only from the protologue, was distinguished from M. pseudincana by a narrower fmit reminiscent of M. daleoides, but width of pod is plausibly interpreted by Lins (1984: 43) as a function of maturity, perhaps influenced by ecology.
213b. Mimosa pilulifera Bentham var. pilulifera.
M. pilulifera Bentham, 1841, I.e., quoad syn. et pi. uruguayens.,
exclus. pi. Pohl.,
Claussen. et Langsdorff. —"Uruguay, Tweedie, Baird.^' = Acacia sprengelii sensu Hooker & Amott, Bot. Mis.
3: 209.
1833, non DeCandolle, exclus. basionym.—Syntypi, Baird s.n.,
from rio Uruguay below Salto, K (hb. Hook.)! = Burkart, 1948, lam. XII (sinistr.,
majori ex parte); Tweedie 1406, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1845, exclus. pi. sellov. quae = var. pseudincana.
M. tacuarembensis Arechavaleta, Anales Mus. Nac. Montevideo II, 1: 40.
1905.—"Vive en Tacuaremb6.'—Holotypus, examined at MVM by Burkart, 1964: 393.
M. pilulifera fma calvescens Malme, Ark. Bot. 23A(13): 11.
1931.—"Quinca Peixoto pr. Porto Alegre ... 24.
XI.1901 ([Malme in RegneU.
Exped.] II: 578).- Holotypus, S! M. incana sensu Bentham, 1876: 349, ex parte, exclus. pi. omn. e prov. Minarum quae sunt var. pseudincana et pi. Selloana austrobrasiliensi quae est M. incana Benth.
M. pilulifera sensu Malme, 1931: 11, fig. la (pod); Burkart, 1948: 122, fig. 18P(pod), 1964: 392, 1967: 442, 1987: 499; Lms, 1984: 40, fig. 6 + map (Rio Grande do Sul).
Characters as given in key to varieties.
Forming thickets at edge of streams and rivers, on rocky riverbanks, and in low moist places, mostly below 200 m, locally plentiful along lower rio Umguai in Entre Rios and Buenos Aires, Argentina, thence e. through vaUey of rio Negro in Umguay to lower Piratina valley in s. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.—Fl.
Vll-X, sporadically later.—Aromo de los sapos.
214.
Mimosa psittacina Bameby, sp. nov., habitu, pinnis conjugatis, filamentisque inter se liberis M. piluliferae affinis, ab ejus varietate sympatrica pseudincana foliolis crassiusculis fere concoloribus dorso haud incano-tomentellis sed manifeste trinerviis capitulisque ellipsoideis (nec globosis) diversa.
A M. daleoide, quoad capitulomm ambitum comparabili, ulterius filamentis liberis et legumine latiori 3.5-4.3 (nec 2-3) mm lato distat; a M. chrysastra var. chrysastra caulibus plumulosotomentellis (nec glabratis), capituUs ellipsoideis (nec globosis), coroUaeque lobulis stellatis (nec retrostrigulosis), ulterius foliolis dorso ante costam stellatis (nec glabris) et filamentis basi haud connatis diverget.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: S. do Papagaio (±22°S, 44°44'W),y4. deSaint-HilaireD/480d.-Holotypus, P = NY Neg. 11819.
Shrubby but of unknown stature, with slender livid defoliate trunks and densely foliate hornotinous branchlets concealed by floccose tomentum of fine sordid gray-plumulose setae to ±0.3-0.4 mm, the If-axes and peduncles more shortly but as densely stellulate-tomentulose, the small thick-textured crowded lfts subconcolorous, glabrous above, beneath thinly stellate only around apex and on side anterior to the midrib, the narrowly eUipsoid capitula soUtary and paired in the axil of contemporary lvs, immersed in foliage. iS^/pw/^^ erect, linear-subulate 2-4 x 0.3- 0.5 mm, bluntly 1-nerved, persistent on defoliate tmnks.
Leaf-stalks 2.5-5 mm, tomentulose like stem; spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 2-4.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 17-30-jug., subequilong or very gradually decrescent distally, the first pair 0.4- 0.8 mm distant from ascending subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-1 mm, the blades oblong or oblongelUptic obtuse from broadly auriculate base, those near mid-rachis 2.4-6 x 1-2.2 mm, 1.9-3 times as long as wide, above nerveless or almost so, beneath 3(-4)-nerved from pulvinule, the moderately displaced midrib simple or 1-branched beyond middle, the inner posterior nerve expiring beyond mid-blade, the outer one(s) much shorter.
Peduncles very slender 12-23 mm; capitula without filaments 5-6.5 x 3 mm; bracts ±0.5 X 0.4 mm, thinly stellulate dorsally, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, only some distal ones bisexual; calyx submembranous shallow-cupular 0.15-0.2 mm, the rim minutely ciliolate; corolla turbinate 1.7-2.1 mm, densely yellowish-stellate and below the sinuses pallidly retrostrigulose, the ovate concave, scarcely thickened lobes ±0.8 X 0.7 mm; filaments (presumably ochroleucous, drying brown) free, exserted 2.2-3 mm; staminodia 0.
Pods 1-5 from near top of receptacle, sessile, in profile undulately linear (12-)14-24 X 3.5^.3 mm, (2-)3-6-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.5-0.6 mm wide, the papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, the replum almost and the valves quite concealed by sordid-yellowish stelliform setulae less than 0.2 mm tall, when ripe breaking up into individually dehiscent, free-falling articles 3-4.5(-5) mm long; seeds (few seen) plumply compressedobovoid ±2.8 X 2.3 mm, the testa fuscous dull.
In unrecorded habitat, to be sought in submontane thickets near or above 1000 m, known only from the type, collected near 44°40'W in Sa. da Mantiqueira in s. Minas Gerais, Brazil. — n . ±XII.
In the context of related species with conjugate-pinnate leaves, most of which are of extratropical dispersal, the distinctive characters of M. psittacina are: a) thick-textured leaflets glabrous above, 3-nerved beneath and there thinly stellate on that part of the blade not covered by the leaflet next below it; b) ellipsoid, not globose capitula; c) corolla stellate on the lobes but retrostrigulose on the tube below the sinuses; and d) filaments free to the base.
Mimosa chrysastra var. chrysastra, known only from Mt. Itambe in central Minas Gerais, resembles it overall, but has leaflets glabrous on both faces, glabrate (not tomentose) stems, globose capitula, corolla simply retrostrigulose, and shortly monadelphous filaments.
Mimosa daleoides, which ranges southand westward from Sao Paulo, has simUar (though generally longer) capitula, but narrower leaflets tomentulose on both faces, a pod only 2-3 (not 3.5-4.3) mm wide, and once again monadelphous filaments.
Mimosa pilulifera var. pseudincana, which ranges feebly north into southem Minas Gerais, differs in conspicuously bicolored 1-nerved leaflets glabrous above and tomentulose beneath, and capitula exactly globose, but has similar pod and filaments.
The thick-textured leaflets thinly stellate where not covered by the next lower leaflet forcibly suggest distantly allopatric M. pilulifera var. pilulifera, but this (cf. Burkart, 1948: 122, fig. 18, lam. 12) again has little globose capitula and essentially 1-nerved leaflets.
Mimosa psittacina is represented in the Paris herbarium by three sheets of specimens so similar among themselves as to appear parts of one collection, but they are differently and ambiguously labelled.
The sheet designated holotypus consists of several branchlets ticketed with the number 480d, but locality-data are lacking.
The second sheet bears Saint-Hilaire's number CV 489; the single stem thereon is ticketed 490d with query.
The number must be mistaken, for CV 489 is described in Saint-Hilaire's fieldbook (P) as a papilionacea.
The third sheet repeats the corrupt number CV489 and the specimen is ticketed 490d with query, to which is added the word Papagayo.
Saint Hilaire's fieldbook D records field-numbers ±490-515 taken in the Sa. da Mantiqueira in the general vicinity of Ibitipoca and Baependi, where Sa. do Papagaio is also located.
Circumstantial evidence points to a common origin for all three sheets on Sa. do Papagaio.
215.
Mimosa rocae Lorentz & Niederlein, Informe cient.
Exped.
Rio Negro, Bot. 213, lam. 3.
1881.—"[Argentina.
Buenos Aires:] .
.
. en la Sierra Currumalan—30,IV.
Sierra de la Ventana-l.V."-Holotypus (Burkart, 1948: 127), Lorentz 13, +B = F Neg. 14331; isotypus, CORD, not seen.
M. roca^ sensu Burkart, 1948: 125,fig.18R; 1964: 396; 1967: 443,fig.138A-E; Lins, 1984: 53.
Prostrate unarmed microphyUousshrublet from stout woody base forming intricately branched mats of foliage 4-14 dm diam., the defoliate tmnks brown glabrate, the young stems, foliage and fls sordidly gray-stellate-lepidote with multiradiate, almost stemless setulae, the small crowded lfts paler and a little more densely pubescent above than beneath, the globose capitula solitary and paired in distal If-axils on peduncle longer than subtending If.
Stipules firm erect subulate 0.4-1.4 mm, tardily deciduous.
Petioles including hard pulvinus 0.7-3(-4) mm, at middle 0.3-0.4 mm diam.; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 4- 12 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.4-1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (5-)7-12-jug., scarcely graduated, the blades Unear-oblong to narrowly elliptic from obliquely truncate base, obtuse at apex, the longer ones 1.5-4 x 0.6-1.5 mm, 2-3.5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, the simple subcentric midrib bluntly prominulous beneath.
Peduncles (5-)6-27 mm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtusefl-budsdensely steUate, the receptacle ±1.5 mm; bracts triangular-ovate to oblanceolate 0.4- 0.7 mm, persistent;y7ow^r5 4-merous 4-androus, all bisexual; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.4- 0.5 mm, glabrous extemally, the subundulate rim minutely ciliolate; corolla turbinate-campanulate 2.4-2.9 mm, the rather thick-textured yellowish deltate-ovate lobes 1-1.4 x 0.8-1 mm; filaments yellow, united at very base to the corolla but free from each other, exserted 1.5-2 mm; staminodia 0; ovary densely stellate after fertilization.
Pods ascending, 2-10 per capitulum, sessile but cuneately attenuate at base, in profile undulately linear, nearly straight, (7-)10- 20 X 3.5-4 mm, (1-)2-4-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, the papery valves low-convex over each seed, the replum and valves aUke densely sordid-tomentulose with strictly stellate or depressed-arborescent setulae to 0.15 mm tall, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent elliptic articles ±5-6 mm long; seeds dark brown ± 4 x 3 mm.
In thin stony soil and on exposed arenitic rock, locally plentiful near 200-700 m on the sierras pampeanas of s. prov. Buenos Aires (Sa.
Bravard and de la Ventana; Sa. de Tandil) and s. Umguay (deptos.
Lavalleja and Maldonado); doubtfully reported from s. end of Sa. do Mar in Rio Grande do Sul (Burkart, 1964: 397), but this is not confirmed by Lins (1984: 53). - R. IX-XIL - Zarza; zarzaparilla.
A matted shmblet, related to M. pilulifera but notably different in habit, habitat, and dense stellate indumentum, M. rocae is, with M. tandilensis, the species ofMimosa extending furthest south in South America, to latitude 38°30'S.
Mimosa rocae was collected for the first time by Friedrich Sellow, perhaps in Uruguay, but no exact locality is on record.
Sellow's material in the Hooker herbarium at Kew was annotated by Bentham as M. incana.
216.
Mimosa berroi Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2- 4): 405, fig. 10.
1964.-"Umguay.
Typus speciei: Tacuarembo, Herb. Berro 1877 "— Holotypus, SI, not seen; isotypus, coUected 24.
XIL1881,K! M. berroi sensu Lins, 1984: 21 + map (Rio Grande do Sul),fig.1.
Stiffly erect shrub or subshrub of unknown potential stature, the virgate new stems, If-axes and peduncles gray-lepidote overall with very shortstemmed or sessile stellate setulae not over 0.2 mm tall, the old stems glabrescent and reddishbrown, the microphyllidous lvs concolorous, the lfts subequally gray-stellate on both faces, the plumply globose capitula of relatively large and few fls single in a succession of distal If-axils on a peduncle nearly as long as or longer than the subtending If.
Stipules erect, narrowly lance-attenuate 2-5(-8) mm, gray-lepidote like stem, faintly 1-nerved, in age dry fragile.
Leaf-stalks including pulvinus 2-8 x 0.4-0.5 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis ±1-4 cm, the interpinnal segments 0.5-1.8 mm; lfts ± 15-22-jug., little graduated but the furthest pair proportionately broader, the first pair 0.1-4 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia vestigial or 0), the blades linear, Unear-oblong or -elliptic from short-auriculate base, obtuse mucronulate at apex, those at and near mid-rachis 2.5-8 x 0.75-1.4 mm, 2.7-5 times as long as wide, all weakly l(-2)- nerved from pulvinule, the centric midrib faintly prominulous dorsally, either immersed or faintly expressed ventrally and sometimes weakly pinnate, the posterior nerve obscure.
Peduncles 12- 30 cm; capitula without filaments 7-9 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the densely packed, plumply obovoid-pyriform fl-buds coated with contiguous, very short, densely branched yellowish setulae; bracts elliptic, acute or short-acuminate 2-2.8 X 1-1.3 mm, densely lepidote extemally, persistent;y/ovv^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, some proximal ones staminate; calyx cuneatecampanulate 0.6-0.9 mm, extemally glabrous brownish, the tmncate rim finely minutely ciliolate; coroUa turbinate-vase-shaped 4.5-5.2 mm, of thick texture, the ovate concave lobes 1.8-2.1 X 1.3-1.5 mm; filaments yellowish, at base free from one another but shortly adnate to corolla, exserted 4-5 mm; anthers ± 1 mm diam.; style attenuate at apex but stigma abmptly dilated.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, sessile, in profile broadly linear or linear-oblanceolate, straight or slightly curved, (1.5-)2-4 x 0.6-1 cm, 6-10("-12")- seeded, the not or scarcely constricted replum shorn of vesture ±0.6 mm wide, the valves lowconvex over each seed, the replum and valves alike very densely hispid overall with contiguous, basally dilated, apically attenuate and scaberulous, bronze-golden setae to 1.5-2 mm, those of replum a little shorter and more densely scaberulous than those of valves, the cavity provided (? always) with rudimentary membranous interseminal septa, the ripe valves valvately separating from replum to release the seeds, these fuscous ±4,5 mm long. In rocky campo and about granitic outcrops, ±100-250 m, apparently rare and local in e. Umguay (deptos.
Rivera, Tacuarembo, Lavalleja) and formerly (according to Lins, 1984, extinct since 1960) in s. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil (near Pelotas), the known localities lying in 30°-34°S, 52°30'-56°30'W.-n. (VI-)VII-XII. Mimosa berroi resembles M. incana in leafformula and indumentum but is apparently a smaller plant, certainly different in plumper capitula, broad interfloral bracts, longer corollas, yeUowish (not pink) fUaments free almost to base, dilated stigma, and valvately dehiscent pod.
According to Lins (1984: 22) there should be no interseminal septa in the pod of M. berroi, but they are evident in the specimens seen by me and were both described and illustrated in the protologue.
Mimosa pilulifera, which is sympatric with M. berroi in Tacuarembo and also has yellowish, essentially free filaments, is more thinly lepidote, with leaflets glabrous above, has capitula mostly geminate and smaller (without filaments 4.5-6, not 7-9 mm diam.), and the appressed-stellate (not burrlike) craspedia break up into free-falling articles.
217.
Mimosa incana (Sprengel) Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 387.
1841.
Acacia incana Sprengel, Syst. veg. 3: 137.
1826.-"BrasU.,
Sello."
-Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
+B = FNeg.
28216, reproduced by Burkart, 1964, lam. II!; isotypus, BM! —Acacia sprengelii Hooker & Amott, Bot. Misc.
3: 205.
1832, exclus. pi. cit. quae = M. pilulifera Bentham; non Mimosa sprengelii DeCandolle, 1825.
M. crassipes Arechavaleta, Anales Mus. Nac. Montevideo II, 1: 38, fig. 7, lam. XI. 1905.-"Vive en Tacuaremb6 ... las muestras del herbario proceden de la Gmta de los Cuervos."
—Holotypus, MVM, seen by Burkart, 1964: 382, 385.
M. incana sensu Bentham, 1875: 409; 1876: 348, minori ex parte, exclus. syn. M. pilulifera et speciminibus e prov. Minas Gerais quae = M. pilulifera var. pseudincana; Lins, 1984: 33,fig.4 + map (Rio Grande do Sul), exclus. exsicc. paraguay. cit. quae = M. flocculosa.
Unarmed, broad-crowned arborescent shrubs 2-4 m, the freely branched young stems, If-axes and peduncles densely tomentulose with erect rufescent plumulose setulae 0.1-0.4 mm, the lfts concolorously gray-stellate-tomentulose overall, the numerous small globose capitula solitary and more often geminate in If-axils of terminal branchlets, forming an ample foliate panicle.
5'r/pw/^5 erect linear-subulate 2-6 x 0.3-0.8 mm, becoming dry fragile, tardily deciduous.
Leafstalks (2-)3-9(-10) X 0.3-0.5 mm, narrowly grooved ventrally, spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones (1.5-)2-3(-5) cm, the interfoliolar segments 1-2.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 12-24(-25)-jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.2-0.4 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.6 mm, the blades oblong-elUptic or oblong obtuse from obtusely auriculate base, the larger ones ±3-9(-l 1) x 1- 3.2(-4) mm, 2.3-3.5 times as long as wide, all faintly 1 -nerved beneath, the midrib subcentric, simple or in some ample lfts faintly pinnate.
Peduncles 5-12 mm; capitula without filaments 5- 7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds densely gray-stellate; bracts sublinear 1-1.5 X 0.2 mm, tomentulose dorsally, tardily deciduous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, most of them bisexual; calyx campanulate membranous brownish glabrous 0.55-0.9 X 0.45-0.8 mm, the rim tmncate or obscurely undulate-denticulate; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.4-3 mm, the firm concave lobes 1-1.2 x 0.65-0.8 mm; filaments pink when young, fading whitish, monadelphous at base into a tube ±1.5 mm enclosing the smooth ovary, sometimes altemating with vestigial staminoda, exserted 3-4 mm.
Pods 1- few per capitulum, sessile, narrowly oblong 8- 18 X 4-8 mm, nearly straight, (1-)2-4-seeded, the replum 0.5-1.4 mm wide, the firm valves scarcely elevated over seeds, the replum and valves alike densely or discontinuously, coarsely hispid with subcontiguous or discrete, erect-incurved stout-based, glabrous or either basally or apicaUy puberulent, yeUowish setae ± 1.5-2.5 mm sometimes mixed with fine stellulae, the cavity intermpted between seeds by tenuous transverse septa, the ripe valves separating from replum and tardily or reluctantly breaking into dehiscent articles ± as long as wide; seeds discoid ± 3—4 mm diam. In moist or swampy, either lowland or montane thickets, widely scattered over Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU s.-ward from 28°S (Lins, 1984, map) and extending s. into deptos.
Livramento, Rio Negro and Rivera, Uruguay.—Fl. (II-)VX. — Vassoura branca.
As shown by Burkart (1964, I.e.), M. incana is readily distinguished from related and habitally similar Calothamnos by pink filaments monadelphous at base and a burrlike fmit coarsely hispid overall with broad-based, subcontiguous or sometimes discrete setae.
The very similar M. berroi, closely sympatric with M. incana in Uruguay and adjacent Rio Grande do Sul, is said to be a smaller shmblet, certainly different in having yellow filaments free to base and an apically dilated, not filiform style.
The present treatment closely follows that of Burkart (1964), who unravelled the confused history and nomenclature of the species.
Lins (1984: 35) cited, perhaps inadvertently, as M. incana the Paraguayan collections Hassler 4583, 9244 and Fiebrig 5629, all representing the distinct (though also pinkflowered) M. flocculosa Burkart, the last being isotypic.
I have no evidence that genuine M. incana extends to Paraguay.
The typus of M. incana was a Sello collection lacking serial number and of unrecorded provenance.
Malme (1931: 12) cited a Sello 3219 from Rio Grande do Sul, perhaps part of the type-collection of Acacia incana Sprengel, but gave no exact locality.
Fmits of M. incana are inordinately variable in width of valves and replum and in density, length and scabrous ornamentation of the setae on the valves.
I have not the material to determine whether this variability is related to dispersal or to habitat.
Sterile, galled fruits, often forming dense spherical clusters (Berro 4628, K), have been described by Burkart and Lins.
218.
Mimosa flocculosa Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 386, fig. 5.
1964.-"Paraguaria .
.
.
Alto Parana, Fiebrig 5629."—Holotypus, SI (not seen); isotypi, G! GH = holotypus of next following! K! M. incana var. robusta Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. 11,59:13.1919.-"Paraguay: Upper Parana, F/^Z^n^, 5629."—Holotypus, GH!; isotypi as in preceding! M. incana sensu Chodat & Hassler, 1904: 554; Lins, 1984: 35, ex parte, quoad paraguayensia; non Bentham.
M.flocculosasensu Bernardi, Boissiera 35: 147.
1984.
Unarmed, coarsely abundantly leafy subarborescent shrubs 1.7-4 m, with simply virgate or more often pyramidally branched homotinous stems, these with If-axes and peduncles densely floccose-tomentose with fine erect sordescent, arborescently plumulose setae to 0.4-0.8 mm, the foliage gray concolorous, the lfts subequally on both faces pannose-tomentulose with subsessile interlocking stellae, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula arising in long succession solitary or commonly 2-4 together from the axil of coevaUy expanding lvs and early surpassed by them, fls and pods often on same branch.
Stipules erect lanceolate 4-12 x 0.7-1.5 mm, pannose dorsally like stem, finely tomentulose within, persistent.
Leafstalks 3-22 x (0.5-)0.6-1.2 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones (2.5-)3-8(-8.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 16-30-jug., a little decrescent proximally and often also distally, the unequal first pair 0.2-1.5 mm distant from subulate, often unequal paraphyllidia 0.3-1 mm, the blades oblong-elUptic from deeply obtusangulate base, subapiculate at apex, those near and beyond mid-rachis (6.5-)7-16 X 2.4-4.5 mm, 2.7- 3.5 times as long as wide, aU obscvu"eIy 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the inner posterior nerve produced to or beyond mid-blade, the outer one short or obsolete.
Peduncles 8-24 mm; capitula without filaments 5-11(-15) x 5-6 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid fl-buds canescent; bracts linear-oblanceolate 0.8-1.5 x 0.15-0.2 mm, extemally pubemlent distally, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx campanulate subscarious brownish (0.4-)0.5-0.9 mm, extemally glabrous, the low-deltate teeth 0.1-0.2 mm, minutely ciliolate with plain or partly thickened (but eglandular) setulae to 0.05- 0.15 mm; coroUa narrowly vase-shaped (1.8-)2.4- 3.2 mm, densely retrostrigulose extemally, the ovate concave lobes 0.8-1.3 x (0.6-)0.7-l mm, weakly 1-nerved, at tip antrorsely penicUlate; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.8-1.3 mm around the apically pubemlent ovary, exserted 2.4-3.6 mm, intervening staminodia 0; ovules usually 4.
Pods 1-12 per capitulum, ascending sessile, in profile oblong or oblong-eUiptic, mucronate at apex, 10-18 x 3.5-5 mm, (1-)2-4- seeded, the replum 0.5-0.8 mm diam., the stiffly papery,finaUybrittle valves low-convex over each seed, breaking when ripe into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 3-4 mm long, the replum and valves alike concealed by dense tomentum of short, arborescently plumulose setulae, the valves smooth within, interseminal septa 0; seeds (few seen) compressed-lenticular or discoid 3-3.5 X 2.3-3 mm, the testa olivaceous smooth.
In disturbed brush-woodland, at edge of campo thickets, sometimes along highways, ±250- 400 m, locally gregarious and subdominant, s. e. Paraguay, e. in Brazil to s.-w. Mato Grosso do Sul (rio Amambai) and w. Parana (Cianorte, Campo Mourao, Cascavel), within 23-26°S and 52°30'-56°W.-Fl.
IX-V, perhaps intermittently through the year.
Within its area of dispersal M. flocculosa is readily recognized by conjugately pinnate leaves combined with the floccose tomentum of sect. Calothamnos and subglobose capitula of pink flowers, the corolla retrorsely silky-strigulose.
Mimosa plumosa, vicariant in west-central Paraguay, resembles it in indumentum and number of pinnae, but has leaflets half as many and twice as large, plumper ovoid-ellipsoid capitula, corolla simply pubemlent, and free filaments.
219.
Mimosa plumosa M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 30(7): 91, t. 26.
1889.-"[Paraguay] In valle Y-acan prope Valenzuela. [5] Mart. [1883, Balansa] n. ^^2^.—Holotypus, G!; isotypi, C! F! P! M. plumosa sensu Chodat & Hassler, 1904: 554; Burkart, 1964: 358.
Stout unarmed, coarsely leafy subarborescent shrubs attaining 3 m, with finely ribbed homotinous branches 3-9 mm diam., these with all Ifaxes and peduncles hispid-tomentulose with mixed longer and shorter erect, arborescently branched setae, the longer ones 2-5 mm and simple distally, the shorter ones branched or scaberulous to apex, the subconcolorous brownisholivaceous lfts pannose-tomentose on both faces with shorter-stalked interlocking substelliform setulae, the stout oblong-ellipsoid capitula 1-4 together from the axil of coevally expanding lvs and early surpassed by them, the fmits immersed in foliage.
Stipules erect, narrowly lanceolate 9- 18 X 1-2 mm, pubescent dorsally like stem, becoming dry fragile but persistent.
Leaf-stalks 15- 30 X 1.2-1.6 mm;/7/«A2(2^ 1-jug., the rachis (5-)6- 10.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 5-10 mm; lfts 9-13-jug., subequilong except near base of rachis, the smaU unequal first pair 1.5-3 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 1-2.5 mm, the blades oblong-eUiptic from deeply semicordate base, deltately acute and mucronulate at apex, those at and beyond mid-rachis 17-36 x 5.5-11 mm, 2.7-3.7 times as long as wide, all ventrally veinless or almost so, dorsaUy beneath the stellate vesture prominulously 3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide the blade ± 1:2, the incurved-ascending inner posterior nerve expiring beyond mid-blade, the outer one much shorter.
Peduncles (1.5-)2-5 cm; ca/7/rw/a without filaments ± 15-30 x (9-) 10-13 mm, prior to anthesis conelike hispid; bracts linear or subfiliform 3-5 x 0.2-0.25 mm, dorsally from base upward finely setulose and substellate, the remotely branched setae to 1.2-2 mm, intermixed with minute gland-tipped setulae; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, all bisexual; calyx reduced to a glabrous or minutely ciliolate, obscurely crenulate collar 0.2-0.3 mm tall, the rim either glabrous or minutely ciliolate; corolla submembranous, narrowly funnelform and often a little curved at base, 3 — 4 mm, the tube thinly pubemlent with simple hairs, the ovate, delicately 1-nerved lobes ±1.5-1.7 x 0.8-1 mm, more densely pubescent with small branched hairs; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 4.5- 7 mm; ovary densely lanulose overall or only dorsally.
Pods many in ovoid but not incompressible clusters, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong, obtuse at both ends but apiculate at apex, (2-)3-4-seeded, when well fertilized 15-32 x 6- 8 mm, the replum ±0.5-0.7 mm diam., together with the papery valves hispid and stellate-tomentulose with fine pliant yellowish, basally plumulose but distally glabrous setae 2-3 mm intermixed with short steUiform setulae and minute orange-tipped glandular ones, the ripe valves breaking into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 5-8 mm long, the cavity continuous (no interseminal septa); seeds ±5-6 x 3-3.5 mm, compressed-obovoid-ellipsoid, the testa livid duU.
In thickets at edge of wet campo at ±200-250 m, localized on the w. extension of the Paraguayan Plateau near 20°30'S, 57°W in w.-centr. Paraguay (depto. Cordillera, near Tobati and Valenzuela).-Fl.
XII-III(-?).
This is a very distinct species, distinguished by coarse unijugate leaves, oblong-ellipsoid capitula of pink flowers, these pilosulous with mostly simple (the corolla-lobes with some branched) hairs, filaments free to base, and small gland-tipped setulae intermixed with longer, basally plumulose and shorter, substelliform setae of floral bracts and pods.
220.
Mimosa involucrata Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 386.
1841.-"Brazil, Sello."
'- Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1844; presumed isotypi, Sello s.n.,G\ = Y Neg. 28217, M!W! M. involucrata sensu Bentham, 1875: 409; 1876: 348; in Hooker, Ic. t. 1207.
1877; Burkart, 1964: 376; 1979: 170; Lins, 1984: 36,fig.5 + map (Rio Grande do Sul).
Unarmed humifuse shrublets with adventitiously rooting woody branches, the short, densely foliate homotinous branchlets incurved-ascending, these with If-axes pilose with slender ascending flagelliform, proximally branched setae ±1-1.5 mm, the foliage gray concolorous, the imbricate lfts subappressed-plumulose-setose beneath, densely stellate above, continuously pallid-marginate and finely setose-ciliate, the broad hemispherical capitula solitary and short-pedunculate in distal If-axils.
Stipules erect lanceolate 2.5-5 x 0.8-1.4 mm, 3-nerved, early dry papery brownish, dorsally glabrous or early glabrate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-6 x 0.4-0.6 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 9-24(-28) mm, the interfoliolar segments ±1-1.5 mm; lfts (8-)9- 15(-17)-jug., scarcely graduated, the first pair ±0.5 mm distant from minute setiform paraphyllidia, the blades oblong-elUptic from semicordate base, deltately acute, the longer ones ±4,5-8 X 1.5-2 mm, all shallowly concave ventrally, nerveless above, beneath 1-2-nerved, the simple midrib moderately displaced, the posterior nerve expiring near or short of mid-blade.
Peduncles 3-14 mm; capitula without filaments ± 1 cm diam., prior to anthesis conelike and at anthesis resembling the capitulum of some Asteraceae, involucrate by 3-4 graduated ranks of pallid lanceolate, dorsally pubemlent, internally glabrous bracts, the fls all subvertically ascending; involucral bracts resembling stipules in texture but more densely pubemlent dorsally, the outermost 2-3 mm, the inner to 12 mm long, the bracts subtending fls narrower and of thinner texture, much surpassing the associated fl, plumulose-ciliate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx hyaline, less than 1 mm, minutely toothed, extemally glabrous, silky-ciliolate; corolla membranous, narrowly vase-shaped ±4.5 mm, the plane ovate 1-nerved lobes ± 1.2 x 1 mm, thinly silky dorsally; filaments pink (teste Lins), free to base, exserted ±3 mm.
Pod subtur^dly ellipsoid 8-14 X 5-7.5 mm (1-)2-4-seeded, the valves densely comose-setose, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles, the cavity divided by membranous interseminal septa.
In rocky campo and on moist stony streambanks on and near the crest of the coastal cordiUera of extratropical BrazU in lat. 25°30'-29°S, in scattered stations from far e. Parana (Morretes) to s.-e. Sta. Catarina and immediately adj. Rio Grande do Sul (but see discussion immediately following).-Fl.
IX-IV. Lins (1984) recorded the fresh filaments of this remarkable minosa as pink and the outer involucroid bracts of the capitulum whitish or yellowish when fresh, but deciduous.
As she has remarked (I.e.), the capitula, which resemble superficially those of some Compositae, are indeed unique in sect. Calothamnos and the prostrate habit is matched only in M. lepidorepens.
A specimen labelled "Sao Paulo" (Gaudichaud 8431, BM) may in reality be part of a Sello gathering from further south.
A second, Glaziou 8431 (P), said to be from Serra do Mar in far southwestern Rio de Janeiro ("haut de la Serra do Ariro [Arire].-Bel arbuste, fl. jaunes."
), may be another case of spurious locality data and actually collected by Mosen or Puiggari far to the southwest of Rio (cf. Wurdack, Taxon 19: 911.
1970).
At the very least these intratropical localities require modem confirmation.
D. sectio HABBASIA DeCandoUe Mimosa sect. Habbasia DeCandoUe, Prodr. 2: 428.
1825 & Mem. Legum. 7: 418.
1826.-Sp. typica sub ser. Habbasia indicatur.
Trees, shrubs, subshrubs, and herbs, a few monocarpic, extremely diverse in habit and adaptation to environment, but no scandent shmbs and no serial cat's-claw aculei.
Indumentum complex, but almost always containing an element of basally dilated or bulbous setae, these mostly basifixed and terete, but some basally spurred (laterally attached above base) or dorsiventrally compressed, many attenuate distally andflageUiform;glandular setae common but not universal.
Stipules prevailingly plurinerved, but the nerves in some immersed or perceptible only adaxially, dorsally 1-nerved only in some Setosae transitional to sect. Batocaulon.
Pinnae, except in M. (Habbasia) weddelliana, two or more pairs, the lfts most commonly small and numerous, few and large only in specialized ser. Pseudocymosae and Piresianae.
Flowers in most capitulate, the capitula varying from globose to ellipsoid or clavate, in M. (Habbasia) miranda and M. (Rojasianae) chacoensis spicate, the individual fl (rare anomalies within a given capitulum) tetramerous and diplostemonous.
Fruit a craspedium or, in the large ser. Pachycarpae and in M. (Bipinnatae) brachycarpa, valvately dehiscent.
Spp. 78, all but two native in and all but nine endemic to S. America, ranging from warm temperate Argentina n. to the Gulf States of U.S.A. and the West Indies; one (M. pellita) circumtropical.
I here adopt Bentham's division (1875: 389) ofthe diplostemonous Mimosae into two groups, one almost constantly setose and the other as often not so.
The accretion of species unknown in 1875 has confirmed and emphasized the dichotomy between them, and justifies their taxonomic recognition at the sectional level.
It is admitted that a few species of Batocaulon, for example M. (Echinocaulae) echinocaula, M. (Paucifoliatae) maracayuensis, and M. (Acanthocarpae) galeottii, have hispidly setose or setaculeate stems, but each of these is unique in the context of its series, which is defined by a syndrome of shared characters, and none has any direct connection with any particular Habbasia.
Likewise, a very few species of Habbasia have lost all but a rudiment of setose indumentum, while retaining all other characters of the section.
The setose indumentum of sect. Habbasia, a feature that it shares with haplostemonous sect. Mimosa, appears to have been inherited from a common forebear, whereas the random appearances of similar trichomes in sect. Batocaulon are independently derived and secondary.
In practice, the only species troublesomely ambiguous between sects.
Habbasia and Batocaulon are the smaU ser. Setosae, some of which approach, especially in the 1-nerved stipules, the ser. Glandulosae of sect. Batocaulon.
However, most Setosae cannot be distinguished from some members of sect. Habbasia ser. Pachycarpae by any known character other than their craspedial fmit, and are consequently classed herein with sect. Habbasia.
Specific differentiation within sect. Habbasia starts at a more advanced stage of specialization than within sect. Batocaulon.
In Habbasia a basic syndrome of capitate and tetramerous flowers, broad plurinerved stipules, and setose indumentum must have been stabilized prior to specific radiation.
The few instances in sect. Habbasia of spicate inflorescence are interpreted as individual reversions to a more primitive state.
11 Conspectus of sect. Habbasia ser. Setosae Bameby.—Microphyllidious shrubs and subshmbs, commonly but not always glandular, armed or not.
Stipules 1- or rarely 5-nerved, or firm and externally nerveless.
Pinnae (4-)6-34-jug., interpinnal spicules present or not, Ift-venation palmate, often faint.
Fls capitate; calyx glabrous, ciliolate, or pappiform; fmit a craspedium with relatively slender replum 0.5-1(-1.6) mm wide.—Seven spp. of extra-Amazonian tropical Brazil and s.-e. Bolivia, one extremely widespread and pluriracial, the rest highly localized and monomorphic. ser. Pachycarpae Bentham.—Microphyllidious trees, shrubs and subshrubs, some functionally herbaceous, all but two unarmed, these charged on stem-internodes with antrorse aculei.
Indumentum partly or largely of bulbous-based orflagelliformsetae, often mixed with gland-tipped ones.
Stipules mostly firm and broad, with immersed venation, in few spp. striately multivenulose.
Pinnae 4-44-jug., the If-stk only exceptionally spiculate, the Ift-venation palmate or indistinct.
Units of inflorescence globose, ellipsoid, or clavate, mostly axillary or becoming so, rarely scapose, the calyx either tmncate or denticulate, glabrous or setulose, the corolla 3-7 mm.
Fruit turgid, valvate, the replum 1-7 mm wide, the firmly papery or leathery-crustose valves separating in one piece. —39 spp. of the cerrado province in e. Brazil (centr. Bahia to S. Paulo, w. to Mato Grosso, most numerous and diverse about the sources of rio Tocantins and in Sa. do Espinha^o). iii. ser. //a^^a^/a.—Microphyllidious treelets, shrubs, and herbs, 1 monocarpic, eglandular, either armed or not, the aculei scattered on stem, If-axes, or both.
Stipules 5-50-nerved, the nervation rarely immersed.
Pinnae 1-17-jug., the If-stk spiculate (except in M. strigillosa), the spicules in some much elongated, the lfts subparallelnerved.
Rs capitate or (M. miranda) spicate; calyx-lobes commonly setiform or paleaceous, the whole calyx in one sp. subobsolete.
Fruit a 2-24-seeded craspedium.—Ten spp. widespread in tropical and warm temperate N. and S. America, one circumtropical. iv. ser. Bipinnatae DeCandolle.—Microphyllidious shrubs and subshrubs, either unarmed or randomly aculeate on intemodes, glandular or not, the cauline and foliar setae either smooth or plumulose, sometimes dorsiventrally compressed, sometimes calcarate.
Stipules striately nerved.
Pinnae (1-)2-30-jug., the lf-stks spiculate, the spicules either terete or laminiform, Ift-venation subparallel.
Rs capitate, the calyx either truncate or denticulate, the corolla-lobes commonly 3-11- but sometimes only 1-nerved.
Fruit of all (so far as known) a slender 5-10-, rarely to 20-seeded craspedium, that of M brachycarpa valvate and only 2-5-seeded.—12 spp. mostly confined to planaltine and Amazonian Brazil, one widely dispersed through tropical N. and S. America e. of the Andes, from s. Mexico and Jamaica to Paraguay and n.-e. Argentina.
V. ser. Neptunioideae Bameby.—Weakly frutescent subshrubs and herbs, one monocarpic, rarely glandular, unarmed or weakly armed, all microphyllidious.
Stipules striately 2-50-nerved.
Pinnae (1-)2-9-jug., interpinnal spicules present, Ift-venation subparallel.
Fls capitate, the calyx ciliolate or not.
Fruit a craspedium, the replum splitting apart at apex to release the (1-)2-7 articles.—Four spp., two localized around s.-w. edge of Amazon Basin in Bolivia and adj. Brazil, one in tropical Mexico and C. America, one widespread from s. Mexico and Lesser Antilles through Amazonia. vi. ser. Rondonianae Bameby.—Microphyllidious shrubs, unarmed, eglandular.
Stipules striately venulose.
Pinnae 2-4-jug., each subtended dorsally by a venulose stipel, interpinnal spicules laminiform, Ift-venation subparallel.
Rs aggregated into a conelike capitulum, each subtended by a venulose bract; calyx minutely ciliolate.
Fruit unknown.—One sp. of w. Brazil (Rondonia). vii. ser. Rojasianae Bameby.—Microphyllidious unarmed subshmbs, sometimes glandular.
Stipules striately 7-15-nerved.
Pinnae 5-9-jug., interpinnal spicules 0, Ift-venation palmate with connecting secondaries.
Rs either capitate or spicate; calyx either subtruncate or denticulate.
Fmit a craspedium.—Three spp. of s.-e. Bolivia and Paraguay. viii. ser. Pseudocymosae Hassler.—Diffiise unarmed macrophyUidious subshmb, eglandular except the fmit.
Stipules striate.
Pinnae 1-2-jug., interpinnal spicules 0, Ift-venation palmate and reticulate.
Rs capitulate; calyx shallowly campanulate subtmncate, minutely ciUolate.
Fmit a craspedium.—one sp. of s.-centr. Paraguay. ix. ser. Piresianae Bameby.—Macrophyllidious shrubs ortall subshmbs, unarmed and eglandular.
Stipules amply foliaceous but not extemally venulose.
Pinnae 1-4-jug., interpinnal spicules 0, Ift-venation palmate and in one also reticulate.
Calyx paleaceous-pappiform.
Fmit a craspedium.—Three spp. of s. periphery of Amazon Basin in Brazil.
Key to series and few species of sect. Habbasia 1.
MicrophyUidious, the larger lfts mostly less than 12 mm, exceptionally to 18 mm long but less than 7 mm wide, and rarely less than 10 pairs on longer pinnae.
2.
CoroUa-lobes 3-11-nerved D(iv). ser. Bipinnatae (p. 446).
2.
CoroUa-lobes 1-nerved.
3.
Each pinna subtended on If-rachis by a striate stipel resembling a stipule in texture and venation; capitula ellipsoid conelike; local in centr. Rondonia, Brazil D(vi). ser. Rondonianae (p. 480).
3.
No stipel at base of pinnae.
4.
Cauline setae attached laterally shortly above base, in profile appearing calcarate.
5.
Capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam.; pod 7-10 x 1.3-1.6 cm; M. orinocoensis in: D(iii). ser. Habbasia (p. 427).
5.
Capitula without filaments 2.5-4.5 mm diam.; pod l-6(-9) x 0.3-0.5 cm D(iv). ser. Bipinnatae (p. 446).
4.
Cauline setae either symmetrically or obliquely basifixed, either terete or dorsiventrally compressed but not basally calcarate.
6.
Stems and lf-stks unarmed.
7.
Stipules either l-3(-5)-nerved dorsally or, if several-nerved, the nerves immersed dorsally, prominulous (if at all) only on inner face.
8.
Diffiise or humifuse, functionally herbaceous subshrub of extratropical Brazil and Paraguay, with lf-formula iii-vi/6-10; cf M. maracayuensis in sect. Batocaulon ser. Paucifoliatae (p. 208).
8.
Variable in life-form, but if like the last the lf-formula much higher and dispersal tropical planaltine; lfts of longer pinnae 10-65-jug. 9.
Functionally herbaceous subshrub of central Brazilian Planalto with virgately erect stems 1.5-2 m and lf-formula ii-v/10-15; craspedium linear 13-18-seeded; cf monotypic sect. Batocaulon ser. Echinocaulae (p. 195).
9.
Dissimilar in habit and lf-formula; pod 3-12(-13)-seeded.
10.
Pod valvately dehiscent, the valves separating entire from a replum well over 1 mm wide; endemic to and highly diversified in planaltine Brazil (s. Bahia to S. Paulo, w. to Mato Grosso), especially numerous and critical in centr. and s. Goias and Distrito Federal D(ii). ser. Pachycarpae (p. 366).
10.
Pod a conventional craspedium with replum usually less than 1 mm wide (to 1.5 mm wide in M. accedens of Distrito Federal and immediately adj. Goias) D(i). ser. Setosae (p. 350).
7.
Stipules prominulously or striately 7-50-nerved dorsally.
11.
Treelets of Chapada dos Veadeiros in e.-centr. Goias; M. rhodostegia of: D(ii). ser. Pachycarpae (p. 366).
11.
Herbs and subshrubs of wide dispersal.
12.
Stems either erect or diffiise but not adventitiously rooting at nodes; interpinnal spicules either present or 0.
13.
Interpinnal spicules present; midrib of lfts subcentric simple, flanked by one anterior and one posterior simple nerve; widely dispersed D(v). ser. Neptunioideae (p. 473).
13.
Interpinnal spicules 0; midrib of lfts branched beyond middle and the secondary nervules brochidodrome within the margin D(vii). ser. Rojasianae (p. 481).
12.
Stems humifuse radicant; interpinnal spicules 0; mostly extratropical, both in N. and S. America; M. strigillosa in: D(iii). ser. Habbasia (p. 427).
6.
Stems and often some lf-stks armed.
14.
Lfts subparallel-nerved, one simple anterior and one simple posterior nerve flanking the midrib and produced almost or quite to blade apex.
D(iii). ser. Habbasia (p. 427).
14.
Lft-nervation otherwise.
Retum to choice 10/10.
1.
MacrophylUdious, the larger lfts 20-70 x 10-40 mm, those of longer pinnae at most 10-jug. 15.
Diffuse shmbs of Paraguay with flexuous, randomly few-branched inflorescence; stipules striately many-nerved; calyx short-campanulate, the rim minutely setulose D(viii). ser. Pseudocymosae (p. 485).
15.
Tall erect shmbs of s. Amazonian Brazil with amply paniculate or pseudoracemose, multicapitulate efoliate inflorescence; stipules firm or foliaceous, the venation immersed or almost so; calyx paleaceous-pappiform D(ix). ser. Piresianae (p. 486).
D(i).
Series SETOSAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Habbasia DeCandoUe ser. Setosae Bameby, ser. nov., inter ser. Pachycarpas et sect. Batocauli ser. Glandulosas quasi ambigens, a prima haud nisi fructu craspediiformi reploque suo saepissime angustiori (M. accedenti excepto minus quam 1 mm lato), a secunda, praeter sect. Habbasiae pubem setosam characteristicam, capituUs majusculis absque filamentis 8 mm et ultra diametientibus, flosculis majusculis (3-)3.5-5.2 mm longis, filamentis per 0.5-1 mm monadelphis, necnon legumine saepissime latiori 5-13 mm lato diversa.—Sp. typica: M. setosa Bentham.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Asperatae *** Glandulosae Bentham, 1875: 437, ex parte [spp. 260, 261].
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Pachycarpae Bentham, 1875: 439, ex parte [spp. 272, 273].
Microphyllidious shrubs and subshrubs, armed or not, the aculei when present scattered, straight or gently curved but not of serial cat's-claw type.
Indumentum at least potentially triple, composed of villi, plain setae (sometimes stiff* and aculeiform), and gland-tipped set(ul)ae, but the three types of trichome independently variable in quantity and each sometimes lacking, the setae in two spp. scaberulous, in the rest smooth.
Stipules either linear-lanceolate and less than 2 mm wide, 1- or rarely to 5-nerved, or broad-lanceolate and then of firm texture and indistinctly nerved, or in one sp. (M. acroconica) broadly dilated caducous.
Lf-formula (iv-)vi—xxxiv/ (14-)15-60(-65); interpinnal spicules present or 0.
Capitula globose or plumply ovoid, without filaments (6-)8-12(-20) mm diam.; calyx-tube 0.4-0.6(-0.7) mm, extemally glabrous or (M. melanocarpa) setulose, the minutely denticulate or truncate rim either glabrous, or ciliolate, or fimbriolate, or sometimes coarsely setose-ciliate and the calyx then pappiform; bisexual corollas (3-)3.3-5.2 mm; filaments monadelphous through 0.5-1.4 mm.
Pods either sessile or stipitate, the linear body (5-)6-13 mm wide, the replum 0.5-1 (-1.6) mm wide, the valves articulate when ripe.
Spp. seven, two widely dispersed over the Brazilian Planalto and one of these (M. setosa) complexly multiracial, the rest nearly monomorphic and of restricted range either within that of M. setosa (Goias and s. Ceara s. to w. Minas Gerais and e. S. Paulo) or beyond it in s. Mato Grosso and e. Bolivia.
The series Setosae is built up by accretion around a nucleus of polymorphic M setosa, which presents both armed and unarmed aspects.
It consists of species in some respects transitional between sect. Habbasia and sect. Batocaulon, differing from the former's ser. Pachycarpae in the articulate pod with relatively narrow replum, and from the latter's ser. Glandulosae in setose indumentum, generally larger flowers and consequently bigger capitula, filaments more strongly fused at base, and usually but not invariably wider craspedia.
The ambivalent affinities of the Setosae between sect. Habbasia and sect. Batocaulon were already illustrated by Bentham's treatment of the species known up to 1875.
In ignorance of the fruit, which has tumed out to be a craspedium, Bentham referred M. setosa and M. riedelii to ser. Pachycarpae; and disposed of M. melanocarpa and M. paludosa, herein evaluated as an armed subspecies of M. setosa, in ser. Asperatae close to the Glandulosae of this revision.
Of the seven Setosae here recognized, M. accedens most closely approaches ser. Pachycarpae in the pod's stout replum, but has nevertheless the craspedial dehiscence of M. setosa.
Mimosa melanocarpa differs from the habitally similar M. setosa subsp. setosa principally in rhythm of flowering and in an extemally setulose calyx.
Mimosa riedelii and M. orbignyana suggest virgate Pachycarpae in ample leaves, wandlike inflorescence, and lack of interpinnal spicules, but are distinguished in any context by scaberulous setae and inequilateral leaflets.
In another direction the short pinnae and simplified leaf-formula of M. caliciadenia, although combined with capitula of M. setosa, are reminiscent of M. (Glandulosae) corynadenia.
Conspectus of ser. Setosae Mimosa * Setae of indumentum smooth; midrib of lfts subcentric.
221. setosa Bentham 1. subsp. paludosa (Bentham) Bameby a. var. paludosa b. var. metadenotricha Bameby II. subsp. setosa a. var. setosa b. var. pseudomelas Bameby c. var. nitens (Bentham) Bameby d. var. rupigena Bameby III. subsp. urbica Bameby a. var. urbica b. var. urbana Bameby IV. subsp. granitica Bameby 222. melanocarpa Bentham 223. caliciadenia Bameby 223bis. acroconica Bameby 224. accedens Bameby ** Setae of indumentum scaberulous; midrib of lfts displaced to divide blade ±1:2.
224bis. aguapeia Bameby 225. riedelii Bentham 226. orbignyana Bameby Key to species of ser. Setosae I. Stems aculeate.
2.
Lfts of longer pinnae 26^2-jug.; pods (5-)6-12-seeded; widespread over Brazilian Planalto; aculeate subspp. of: 221.
M. setosa (p. 352).
2.
Lfts of longer pinnae 16-22-jug.; pods 3-5(-6)-seeded; local in upland centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.
3.
Lvs at least shortly petiolate; stipules and bracts subtending peduncles narrowly lanceolate, less than 2 mm wide; local near Diamantina 223.
M. caliciadenia (p. 360).
3.
Lvs sessile, the first pair of pinnae arising directly next to If-pulvinus; stipules and bracts subtending peduncles broadly dilated, papery, 6.5-12 x 4-8 mm; Sa. do Cabral 223bis.
M. acroconica (p. 361).
1.
Stems unarmed.
4.
Cauline setae smooth; midrib of lfts subcentric.
5.
CoroUa and calyx both quite glabrous; pinnae 15-24-jug. and the rachis of longer ones only 1.5- 3.8 cm; interpinnal spicules 0; stems hispid with setae 3-9 mm; replum of pod 1-1.5 mm wide; stems arising anew yearly from xylopodium, attaining 4-8 dm, the peduncles all axillary to and surpassed by lvs of proportionately long and narrow outline; Distrito Federal and adj. Goias.
224.
M. accedens (p. 362).
5.
CoroUa-lobes setulose or glandular-setulose extemally, but calyx either glabrous or setose; if calyx glabrous, either the pinnae fewer and longer, or the cauline setae shorter, or interpinnal spicules present (or some combination of these characters) and replum of pod less than 1 cm wide; stems various, but young inflorescences almost always pseudoracemose exserted; widespread over Brazilian Planalto (including Distrito Federal).
6.
Calyx-tube extemaUy glabrous, the rim alone ciliolate; articles at middle of craspedium 3-6 mm long; flowering primarily in September-March; unarmed subspp. of: 221.
M. setosa (p. 352).
6.
Calyx-tube densely setulose extemally as well as ciliate; articles at middle of craspedium 6- 11 mm long; flowering primarily in May-July 222.
M. melanocarpa (p. 359).
4.
Cauline setae scaberulous; midrib of lfts forwardly displaced to divide blade ±1:2; local either in s. Mato Grosso, Brazil, or in s.-e. Bolivia.
7.
Pinnae of larger lvs 3-6-jug.; larger lfts 14-19 mm; Sa. do Aguapei, far n.-w. Mato Grosso. ... 224bis.
M. aguapeia (p. 363).
7.
Pinnae of larger lvs 17-28-jug.; larger lfts 4.5-10 mm; allopatric.
8.
Lf-stk of major lvs 1.5-4 dm and rachis of longer pinnae 5.5-10 cm; lfts of longer pinnae 33- 42-jug.; peduncles 6-10 mm; pod silky-barbate eglandular; s.-centr. Mato Grosso (Chapada dos Guimaraes) 225.
M. riedelii (p. 364).
8.
Lf-stk of major lvs up to 1.5 dm and rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-5 cm; lfts of longer pinnae 18-21-jug.; peduncles 15-35 mm; pod densely glandular-setose overall; s.-e. BoUvia (Chiquitos) 226.
M. orbignyana (p. 365).
221.
Mimosa setosa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 404.
1842.—Typus infra sub var. setosa indicatur.
Amply leafy microphyUidious, hispid and viscid or glandular-setulose sub-shrubs, shrubs and treelets (0.5-)0.8-5(-6) m, either prickly or not, the pliant arching-ascending or less often stiffly erect, commonly reddish or reddish-brown hornotinous stems, lf-stks and inflorescence with some combination of: a) straight vertical, incurved-ascending, rarely subdecurved, slender or broad-based aculei to (1-)2-9 mm, b) straight tawny setae to (1-)1.5-8(-9.5) mm, c) glandtipped setulae to 0.3-1.2 mm, and often d) some or many fine gray villi, but either aculei, or plain setae, or gland-tipped setulae, or villi, either independently or in various combinations, few or wanting, the pluripinnate multifoliolate lvs at least moderately sensitive, the simple or fewbranched pseudoracemose inflorescence of globose or squatly ovoid-ellipsoid capitula well exserted at anthesis, foUate in fruit.
Stipules lanceattenuate or rarely ovate-acuminate 4-11 (-15) X 0.8-2(-2.5) mm, usually involute, dorsally pubescent like adjacent stem or rarely glabrate, setose-ciliate, glabrous within, deciduous before associated If, absent from many fruiting spms.
Leaf-stalks of fully expanded lvs 6-27(-30), in vars. metadenotricha and rupigena only 3-9 cm, of hysteranthous lvs subtending fruiting peduncles shorter (no further described), the petiole including obese pulvinus commonly 10^5(-60, rarely oiUy 3-10) mm, at middle 0.7-2.5(-3) mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments (3-)7-20 (-25) mm, the ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs and commonly but not invariably spiculate; pinnae (4-)6-21(-24)-jug., the rachis of longer distal ones commonly (1.6-)2.5-7 (in var. urbica to 12 cm), the longer interfoliolar segments (0.5-)0.8-2.5(-3.5) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 22-40(-42)-, in var. urbana only 16-22- jug., the first pair less than 1.5 mm distant from either the pulvinus or minute paraphyllidia, the blades narrowly oblong obtuse, abruptly acute or obtuse-apiculate, the larger ones (2-)3-7.5(-9) x 0.8-2.2(-3) mm, the margin thinly ciliolate with plain setae, gland-tipped setulae, villi (or some mixture of these), facially glabrous or almost so, the midrib and in broader lfts 1 anterior and 1- 2(-4) posterior nerves prominulous beneath, rarely coarsely 3-nerved beneath.
Peduncles solitary and 2-3 together, 1.5-3.5(-6) cm; capitula without filaments 6-11(-13) mm diam., prior to anthesis either moriform or coneUke; bracts narrowly oblanceolate or elliptic-oblanceolate or spatulate 2-5.5(-8) x 0.5-0.9(-1.3) mm, either simply ciliate or both ciliate and dorsally setulose and glandular; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones mostly staminate and often shorter than the rest; calyx-tube either a) campanulate 0.3-0.6 mm, glabrous extemally, the truncate or obscurely lobulate rim either glabrous or with a few fine plain or gland-tipped setulae to 0.2-0.6 mm, or b) pappiform 1.3-2.7 mm, cleft to within 0.3-0.5 mm of base into chaffy setae; coroUa (2.5-)3-5.4 mm, the tube narrowly to broadly funnelform, glabrous externally, the lobes (0.8-)0.9-1.4 mm, a little thickened at apex, 1 -nerved, dorsally finely thinly setulose, or stipitate-glandular, or both (exceptionally glabrous in armed forms); filaments pink, monadelphous through (0.5-)0.6-1.3 mm, exserted 6.5-14.5 mm.
Pods (1-)2-10 per capitulum, either sessile or cuneately contracted at base into a stout stipe to 1-2 mm and at apex into a subulate beak (1-) 1.5-5 mm, the body in profile linear or Unearoblong, straight or subincurved (25-)30-70(-80) X (5.5-)6-12(-13) mm, (3-)5-12(-13)-seeded, the replum (0.7-) 1-1.6 mm wide, straight or very shallowly constricted between seeds, in subsp. paludosa sometimes randomly aculeolate, the valves consisting of livid exocarp 0.05-0.1 (-0.2) mm and papery endocarp 0.05-0.15 mm thick in section, low-convex over each seed, when ripe tardily separating from replum and reluctantly breaking into articles (3-)3.5-5.5(-6) mm long (those at each end of pod longer), the whole pod villosulous, viscid, and hispidulous with scattered plain setae to (0.5-)l-2.5(-3) mm, shorter or subsessile glandular-capitate setulae, and minute villi, the proportions and density of the three types of trichome highly variable; seeds transverse or obliquely basipetal, plumply ovoid 3.5- 4.7(-5) X 2.8-4 mm, the brown or livid-castaneous testa smooth lustrous.
My concept of M. setosa incorporated in the foregoing description is much more comprehensive than that of Bentham, for it includes not only unarmed M. setosa sensu stricto and its var. nitens, but also aculeate M. paludosa, and a number of more local, hitherto undescribed forms.
When Bentham described M. setosa he possessed only one flowering coUection, and assumed, because of its general similarity in foliage and inUnlike Bentham we are now in position to dumentum to the then-known members of ser. know with close approach to exactness the geoPachycarpae, that it would have the thick-waUed, graphical ranges of the various elements of the non-articulate pod of that series.
In this he was M. setosa-paludosa complex.
These, like the submistaken, as the fruit tumed out to be essentially species and varieties of M. somnians, but on a identical with that of Af. paludosa, which he resmaller scale, form a concentric series, focussed ferred, because of its armed stems and the erason the highlands ofthe Tocantins-Sao Franciscopedial dehiscence of the fruit, to ser. Asperatae.
Parana watershed.
The outermost ring correA difference between M. setosa and M. paludosa sponds with the limit of the species and of its known to but not emphasized by Bentham lay subsp. paludosa—as in M. somnians it is the in the calyx, which is pappiform in the former armed type that is furthest dispersed from the and almost or quite devoid of marginal setulae center of diversity.
Within the range of subsp. in the latter.
However calyces of intermediate paludosa and only slightly less extensive lies that form are now known, and that of M. setosa var. of subsp. setosa.
And again within or immedinitens is essentially that of M. paludosa.
The ately adjacent to the last lie subsp. granitica, morphological basis for treating M. setosa and subsp. urbica, and several minor derivatives of M. paludosa as separate species has shrunk to subsp. setosa. difference between aculeate and unarmed states of otherwise essentially similar plants.
Key to subspecies and varieties of M. setosa Dorsal venation of lfts relatively weak or subimmersed, the midrib simple, the anterior and inner posterior primary nerves, when extemally visible, expiring near or below mid-blade; range of the species.
2.
Stems and often some lf-stks armed with scattered, incurved or rarely subdecurved aculei to (1-)2- 9 mm; 221/1. subsp. paludosa: 3.
Shrubs and treelets of low wet places, commonly 1.5-5 m tall, widespread over the whole range of the species; pinnae relatively distant, mostly inserted 7-18 mm apart along lf-stk; larger lfts 3.5-8.5 mm 221/Ia. var. paludosa (p. 354).
3.
Stiffly erect subshrubs 1-1.5 m of well-drained cerrado habitat in Distrito Federal (Chapada da Contagem and vicinity); pinnae crowded, inserted 3-8 mm apart along lf-stk; larger lfts 2-4 mm.
.
221/Ib. var. metadenotricha (p. 354).
2.
Stems and lf-stks unarmed.
4.
Indumentum of homotinous stems and foliage evidently viscid-villosulous, at least the lf-stks and Ift-margin with gland-tipped setulae or, if these few (exceptionally wanting), the floral bracts only 3-5 mm; widespread over Brazilian Planalto; 221/11. subsp. setosa: 5.
Plants copiously setose and viscid-villosulous throughout and the lfts ciliolate with plain setulae, gland-tipped setulae, or both; pinnae of larger lvs mostly 12-21(-24)-jug.; pods hispid on valves and glandular-setose on replum.
6.
Pod sessile or almost so; spicule present between most pinna-pairs; common in S. Goias and Distrito Federal, e. infrequently to centr. Minas Gerais. ... 221/Ila. var. setosa (p. 355).
6.
Pod abruptly contracted at base into a stout stipe 3-8 mm; spicules 0; n.-centr. S. Paulo.
221/IIb. var. pseudomelas (p. 356).
5.
Plants thinly setose and only remotely viscid-setulose or eglandular; pinnae of longer lvs 5- 14-jug.; pods various; centr. and w. Minas Gerais.
7.
Rim of calyx naked or with a few residual setulae 0.2-0.7 mm; stems and lvs at least thinly glandular-setulose; pod remotely glandular esetose; w. Minas Gerais 221/IIc. var. nitens (p. 357).
7.
Rim of calyx densely long-setose, the whole calyx pappiform (as that of var. setosa); stems and lf-stks eglandular; pod densely hispid and glandular-setose; centr. Minas Gerais. .. 221/IId. var. rupigena (p. 357).
4.
Indumentum of homotinous stems and foliage eglandular or almost so, composed of villi and tawny setae only; floral bracts 6-8 mm; local in Distrito Federal; 221/III. subsp. urbica: 8.
Lf-formula xv-xxiii/28-42, and rachis of longer pinnae 6-12 cm. .221/IIIa. var. urbica (p. 358).
8.
Lf-formula iv-xii/16-22, the rachis of longer pinnae 5-8 cm 221/Illb. var. urbana (p. 358).
Dorsal venation of lfts bluntly prominulous, the midrib 1-2-branched on each side beyond mid-blade, the narrowly intramarginal anterior primary nerve and the innermost posterior one produced well above mid-blade, commonly to anastomosis with a secondary nervule from midrib; e.-centr. Goias 221/IV. subsp. granitica (p. 358).
221/1.
Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. paludosa (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. paludosa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 400.
1842.-Typus infra sub var. paludosa indicatur.
Stems aculeate and usually also setose, glandular-setulose and puberulent, but the indumentum variable in density, length and composition; floral bracts 2-5.5 mm, either simply ciliate or both ciliate and dorsally glandular-setose; calyx campanulate 0.3-0.6 mm, the rim either glabrous or with a few random setulae 0.2-0.6 mm.—Range as given under var. paludosa next following.
221/Ia. Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. paludosa (Bentham) Bameby var. paludosa.
M. paludosa Bentham, 1842, I.e., sens, str.—"Brazil, [Riedel, misit] Langsdorff, Claussen; Piauhy, Gardner, n. 1942."—Lectotypus, Gardner 1942, collected "in marshy [ground] near Barra do Jardim [±7°35'S, 39°15'W in s. Ceara], December 1838," K (hb. Hook.)! = IPA Neg. 1291 = NY Neg. 1898; isotypi, BM! E! F! = F Neg. 54853, G! K (hb. Benth.)! NY! P! W!; syntypi, Riedel 7, K! Riedel 663, from "rio das Velhas pr. Sta. Luzia et Sahara," K! LE! US! [Mimosa crulsiana Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 184.
1906, nom. nud.]—"Rio Torto, au Pedro-Jorge [Distrito Federal], no. 21046."
— Specimina authent.,
C! G! K! M! P! S! Mimosa paludosa sensu Bentham, 1875: 437, 1876: 381; Lewis, 1987, fig. 8W. Characters as given in key to subspecies and varieties.
On stream banks, on bars of flood-plains, at edge of gallery forest and in adjoining brejo, surviving in wet pastures and at times forming thickets along roadside ditches, mostly between 600 and 1200 m but ascending on Sa. da Piedade in Minas Gerais to 1600 m, interruptedly widespread and locally common over much of the Brazilian Planalto, from s. Ceara (Chapada de Araripe) s. through interior Bahia and the length of Sa. do Espinha^o in Minas Gerais to e. S. Paulo, w. through s. Goias (and Distrito Federal) and transfranciscan Minas Gerais to s.-e. Mato Grosso and the Parana valley in e. Mato Grosso do Sul; e.-centr. Paraguay (rio Aquidaban).—Fl.
XI-IV(-V), and sporadically through the year.
Map 29.
221/Ib.
Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. paludosa (Bentham) var. metadenotricha Bameby, var. nov., a var. paludosa, caeteris simillima, caulibus rectis subsimplicibus aculeis raris inconspicue munitis necnon foliis confertius microphyllidiis, pinnis inter se plerumque 3-8 (nec 7-14) mm usque semotis foliolisque majoribus 2-4 (nec 3.5-9) mm usque longis diversa; ulterius loca sicca nec palustria habitans. — Brazil.
Distrito Federal: 3 km s. of Sobradinho, 1 .V.
1966 (fl), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 7552i.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, MBM, NY, P, R, S, US.-[M. paludosa var. metadenotricha Bameby in adnot.,
comb. ined.].
Characters as given in key to subspecies and varieties.
In cerrado, sometimes on limestone, ±1000 m, localized on the Contagem-Sobradinho divide in Distrito Federal, Brazil.—Fl.
IV-VI. This visually striking but technically weak variety bears a strong likeness in habit and foliage to M. adenotricha, but differs in sparse armament of subrecurved (not acroscopic) aculei and in the nature of the pod, which breaks at maturity into free-falling articles.
It seems to differ from var. paludosa not only in xeric habitat and life-form, but by flowering in the dry season (April-June).
221/11.
Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. setosa.
M. setosa Bentham, 1842, sensu parum aucto.—Typus infra sub var. setosa indicatur.
Characters as given in key to subspecies and varieties.
My concept of subsp. setosa is embodied primarily in those viscid multifoliolate Setosae in which these characters coincide: a triple pubescence of plain setae, glandular setulae and villi, but no prickles; thin-textured veinless or dorsally faintly costate leaflets spaced to 1-2.5 mm apart along rachis; an extemally glabrous pappiform calyx; corolla lobes charged dorsally with a few subsessile or short-stalked glands intermixed with plain setulae; and a relatively thin-walled, planocompressed pod of which the viUosulous and MAP 28.
Planaltine Brazil.
Range of M. setosa Bentham subsp. setosa and subsp. granitica Bameby. thinly setose valves break irregularly or incompletely into articles wider than long. On this general theme occurs considerable variation in mutual proportions of the three types of trichome, and a number of populations do not answer perfectly to all the ideal morphological conditions.
Further, the floral bracts vary from about twothirds as long to fully as long as the expanded bisexual corollas, the capitulum consequently varying prior to anthesis from conelike to moriform.
Around the nucleus of exactly or nearly typical subsp. setosa, which is most common and most clearly differentiated in southem Goias and Distrito Federal, are clustered several forms in one way or another departing from the idealized formula of the subspecies.
In north-central Sao Paulo the pod, elsewhere sessile or almost so, becomes markedly stipitate, and interpinnal spiciUes are lacking from the leaf-stalk.
This form was known to Bentham, but referred to the related M. melanocarpa, always distinguished by an extemally silky-setose calyx; it is described below as var. pseudomelas.
Locally in western Minas Gerais the calyx is reduced, quite or nearly, to the tube, as in subsp. paludosa, and both plain and gland-tipped setae disappear simultaneously from stem and leaf-stalk; this corresponds to var. nitens Benth.
An anomalous form that retains the pappiform calyx of subsp. setosa but has lost all glandular pubescence below the pod is here described from central Minas Gerais as var. rupigena.
221/Ha.
Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. setosa var. setosa.
M. setosa Bentham, 1842, I.e., sens, str.—"Brazil, Pohl.'\ the locality particularized in Martius, R. bras. 15(2): 387.
1876: "in provincia Goyaz ad Rio S. Marcos."
—Holotypus, Pohl 846 = 1409, collected on MinasGoias boundary m XII. 1818, K. (hb. Benth.)! MAP 29.
Northeastern and planaltine Brazil.
Range of M setosa Bentham var. paludosa (Bentham) Bameby. = NY Neg. 1908; isotypi, K (hb. Hook.)! NY! W! = NY Neg. 11533 (lvs), 11554 (fls).
M. formosana Taubert, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 21: 433.
1896.—"Habitat in locis Cerrados dictis prope Formosa [Goias]: ULE n. 2867. —Flor. m. Sept. [1892]."-Holotypus, +B; isotypus, HBG! Triple indumentum of plain setae, gland-tipped setulae and villi weU developed; lf-stks of major lvs 8-27 cm and pinnae mostly 12-jug. or more, a spicule between most pairs; pods sessile.
In cerrado, sometimes on rocky stream-banks or at edge of gallery woodland, but not in permanently wet places, 650-1150 m, locally abundant in e.-centr. and s.-e. Goias s.-ward from ±14°S and in Distrito Federal, thence weakly and discontinuously e. in Minas Gerais through Sa. do Cabral to centr. Sa. do Espinha50.—Fl.
IX-III, occasionally later.
Map 28.
221/IIb.
Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. setosa var. pseudomelas Bameby, var. nov., a var. setosa legumine basi in stipitem 3-8 mm longum abmpte contracto spicuUsque interpinnalibus nuUis diversa, cum M. melanocarpa a cl.
Bentham. olim commutata, ab hac calycis tubo extus glabro (nec sericeo) leguminisque articulis multo longioribus quam latioribus (seminibus ergo transversis nec descendentibus) distantior.—Brazil.
S. Paulo: ad Vila de Batatais, s.d.,
fl, fr, RegneU ni/510.—Holotypus, K = NY Neg. 11671; isotypus, labelled "inter Canna Verde et S. Joao de Jaguari," S. M. melanocarpa sensu Bentham, 1876: 381, ex parte, quoad pi. a Lund, et RegneU. lectas, caeteris exclusis.
Everything of subsp. setosa except that the lfstks lack interpinnal spicules and the pod is stipitate, thus resembling M. melanocarpa, but with the short and broad 1-seeded articles ofM. setosa sensu lato and consequently transverse, not basipetal seeds.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be expected in cerrado, perhaps in seasonally moist places, apparently local in n.-centr. S. Paulo, Brazil, in lat. 20°-21°S (Franca; Batatais; Araraquara).—Fl.
XII-V(-?).
Map 28.
I have segregated this variety under the epithet pseiuiomelas because it was confused by Bentham with M. melanocarpa.
The type specimen was first identified by Bentham as M. setosa, but later transferred to M. melanocarpa, perhaps because of its stipitate pods.
Theoretically, var. pseudomelas might be interpreted as a link connecting M. setosa with M. melanocarpa, but it is allopatric to both.
I surmise that it represents an independent mutation derived directly from subsp. setosa.
221/IIc.
Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. setosa var. nitens Bentham.
M. setosa var. nitens Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 387.
1876.-"Habitat ad Arrado Velho (prov.?): Pohl."
-Holotypus, Pohl 664, W (2 sheets)! = NYNeg.
11628(fl), 77629(lvs).-Thelocality, probably garbled in transcription, not positively identified, but perhaps corrupted from "Corgo Vermelho" near Luizania, Goias.
Essentially like var. setosa except for suppression of plain and gland-tipped setae; setae of calyx-rim 0.2-0.7 mm, sometimes almost lacking.
In cerrado near 500-700 m, best known from the Triangulo of w. Minas Gerais (Araguari; Campo Alegre; Patrocinio; Araxa), perhaps extending n. just into Goias (see type-statement), recorded in 1844 by WeddeU (no. 2'^7, P) from Cachoeira do Campo, but not since collected in centr. Minas Gerais.—Fl.
XII-II. Map 28.
The var. nitens is visually striking but poorly differentiated from var. setosa by elimination of setose and glandular pubescence.
It appears to replace var. setosa in western Minas Gerais, occupying territory between those of var. setosa and var. pseudomelas.
Weddell's specimen labelled Cachoeira do Campo is under suspicion for this reason: it is dated 1844, when WeddeU had already left central Minas on the highway from Ouro Preto to Goias Velho and was passing through Patrocinio in early February ofthat year.
221/IId.
Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. setosa var. rupigena Bameby, var. nov., a var. setosa praesertim pube eglandulosa parce setosa, foliorum pinnis (ut interdum apud var. nitentem) paucis 5-8-jugis, a var. nitenti autem calyce pappiformi bene evoluto abiens.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: about outcrops, in mun. Gouveia, 1200 m, 6.
IX.1971 (fl, frjun), G. Hatschbach 27302. —Holotypus, NY; isotypus, HBG, and to be sought at MBM.
Puberulent throughout but only thinly hispid with plain setae, eglandular below the stipitateglandular pod; lf-stks 6-9 cm, the pinnae 5-8- jug., the lfts oflonger ones 30-35-jug., puberulent overall, finely remotely setose-ciliolate; calyx of var. setosa (±2.5 mm); corolla-lobes setose eglandular.
About rock-outcrops near crest of Sa. do Espinha90 at 1200 m, known only from municipio Gouveia, near 18°30'S in centr. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-n. X-XI(-?).
Map 28.
The var. rupigena may be merely a casual glandless variant of var. setosa, of which it retains the habit and pappiform calyx, but its occurrence at the far eastem periphery of the range of subsp. setosa in a specialized habitat and in a region of pronounced endemism suggests something more substantial.
Further collections, obviously, are needed.
In addition to varieties of subsp. setosa formally described, I must mention two groups of aberrant specimens which deserve further study.
Two collections from Chapada dos Veadeiros (Irwin 32231, 33045, distributed as M. setosa fma b, NY) have setose stem-pubescence suppressed or almost so, and corollas setulose but eglandular.
These plants, from a locality at the northem known limit of the whole species' range, were coming into flower in late March at elevations probably above 1200 m. Pods are required for positive identification.
Four collections from Chapada da Contagem and vicinity in Distrito Federal (Irwin 11386, 19420, NY; Heringer 13075, NY; Kirkbride 3113, NY) are notable for leaflets of yellowish-green color coarsely 3-nerved on lower face.
These have been annotated or distributed as M. setosa fma c. 221/III. Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. urbica Bameby, subsp. nov., a subsp. setosa pube caulina ac foliorum eglandulosa, pinnamm longiomm rachi elongato 6-8 (nec 3.5-8) cm longo, foliolis plerumque magis dissitis, et praesertim bracteis floralibus elongatis 6-8 (nec 3-5) mm longis flosculum suum manifeste superantibus abstans.—Typus infra sub var. urbica indicatur.
Weakly frutescent, attaining 2 m but often smaller, the stems and If-axes yellowish-setose and minutely villosulous (sometimes only on ventral angles of lf-stk), eglandular; pinnae variable in number (4-23-jug.), the longer ones (5-)6- 12 cm and the longer interfoliolar segments 2- 3.5 mm; floral bracts 6-8 x 0.8-1.2 mm, surpassing the subtended fl by (1-) 1.5-2.5 mm; corolla lobes charged dorsally with scattered pallid tubercles capped or not with a fine setula and often a few short claviform eglandular (randomly gland-tipped) trichomes; pods villosulous overall and thinly yellow-hispid eglandular.
The subsp. urbica apparently replaces subsp. setosa over much of the Paranoa basin in the Federal District.
It may be recognized by very long floral bracts, by the lack (complete or almost so) of glandular trichomes or viscidity, and by the pinnae on the average longer and composed of larger, more distant leaflets.
The subspecies occurs in two forms, var. urbica and the possibly juvenile var. urbana, distinguished (as given above, in key) by leaf-formula.
221/IIIa.
Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. urbica Bameby var. urbica.
M. setosa subsp. urbica Bameby, sens, str. —Brazil.
Distrito Federal: Brasilia, near Setor Industrial, 1050 m. 30.x. 1965 (fl), Irwin (with Souza & Reis dos Santos) 9713. -Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Ascending shrubs; lf-formula as given in key to varieties.
In cerrado, 950-1050 m, locally common in basin of rio Paranoa within the city limits of BrasUia, from the Paranoa dam w. to the head of Corrego Guard, Distrito Federal.—Fl.
X-XII; fr.
XII onward.
221/Illb.
Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. urbica Bameby var. urbana Bameby, var. nov., a var. urbica statura subherbacea diffusa et praesertim foliorum formula (pinnis (3-)4-12-, nec 15-23-jugis usque; foliolis 16-22- nec 28-42- jugis usque), foliolisque submajoribus inter se magis dissitis diversa.—Brazil.
Distrito Federal: Esta9a6 de Biologia da Universidade de Brasilia, 20.11.1969 (fl), E. P. Heringer 11770.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, NY (2 sheets).
Trailing subherbaceous plants, sometimes precociously flowering as erect seedlings; lf-formula as given in key to varieties.
In cerrado, within the range of var. urbica and not known to be ecologically differentiated, known from 4 collections from the type-locality and from Lago I. Pinheiro in Distrito Federal, BrazU.-n. I-II(-?).
221/IV. Mimosa setosa Bentham subsp. granitica Bameby, subsp. nov., ab aliis speciei formis foliolis dorso fortiter obtuse 3-nerviis, costa ultra mediam utrinque pinnatim 1-2-ramulosa, nervis primariis singulo anteriori ac intimo posteriori ultra mediam paginam productis diversa.
Caules nunc hispidi inermes, nunc setoso-aculeati.—Brazil.
Goias: granitic mountain at 1000 m, Chapada dos Veadeiros 20 km w. of Veadeiros, 16.11.1966 (fl), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 12944. — Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, US. M. granitica Bameby in sched.,
nom. nud. = the vulnerantly setaculeate state of the subsp. M. dawsonii Bameby in sched.,
nom. nud. = the simply setose and glandular-vUlosulous state of the subsp. Stems and lf-stks variably hispid with plain setae, viUosulous with minute plain hairs, glandular-setulose, or setaculeate with forwardly curved, weakly vulnerant prickles to 2-A mm, in indumentum ambiguous between subsp. setosa and subsp. paludosa, different from both in venation of relatively broad lfts, as described in key to divisions of M. setosa; pinnae 5-12-jug.; lfts of longer distal pinnae (16-)22-38-jug., the longer ones 5-8 x (1.8-)2-2.6 mm.
Moist rocky places in campo rupestre, 1000- 1250 m, locally common on Chapada dos Veadeiros at points ± 10-20 km n. and n.-w. of Veadeiros, e.-centr. Goias, Brazil.—Fl.
Il-V, fr. remnants long persistent.
Map 28.
The six known collections of subsp. granitica, while alike in venation of leaflets, are extraordinarily diverse in indumentum.
Stems of the type are sharply setaculeate but glandular; those of Dawson 14780 (NY) are thinly stiffly setose and sparsely glandular-setulose; those of Irwin 33045 (NY) are densely softly villosulous and glandular-setulose but unarmed and almost without plain setae.
In preliminary studies I referred the material to two species, for I had not yet accepted, in defiance of long tradition, the assimilation into one species of armed M. paludosa and unarmed M. setosa.
I now interpret these superficially different forms found concentrated on the heights of Chapada dos Veadeiros as constituting trivial variants of one taxon best subordinated to M. setosa sensu lato.
222.
Mimosa melanocarpa Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30:437.
1875 & in Martius, n . bras. 15(2): 381, char, ampliat.
1876.- "Habitat in provincia S. Paulo: Burchell n. 5452; ad ViUa de Batataes ejusdem prov.: RegneU coU.
Ill, n. 510; inter Franca et Rio Grande: Lund; in provincia Minas Geraes inter Tejuco et Rio Paranyhuba: BurcheU n. 5838; inter Goyaz et Cavalcante: Burchell n. 7361, 7724; ad Rio Tocantins: BurcheU n. 8048."—Lectotypus, Burchell 8048, collected near Arraias, Goias (±13''S) in 1828 (late fl, fr), K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1899; syntypi, Burchell 5838 from near Indianapolis in the Triangulo Mineiro, GH! K! L! P! and 7361 from near Goias Velho, GH! K!-Other syntypi represent distinct taxa: M. setosa var. pseudomelas (RegneU III/510; Burchell 5452; Lund s.n.); and sp. dub. (Burchell 7724, fragmentary).
M. adenotrichae affinis Bentham, 1876: 385, in obs. (specimen s.n.,
s. loc. in herb.
M!).
Closely resembling M. setosa subsp. setosa in habit, in triple pubescence (the cauline plain setae sometimes suppressed) and in exserted leafless inflorescence, in stature attaining 1-3 m, different in lfts on average more numerous and more crowded, in extemally setulose calyx, and some features of the pod.
Stipules of M. setosa, but the blades sometimes puberulent internally.
Leafstalks of larger lvs 9-25 cm, the interpinnal segments 8-16(-19) mm; spicules of M. setosa; pinnae 9-16-jug., the rachis of longer ones 3-7.5 (-8.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.8- 1.4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (36-)40-60(-65)- jug., narrowly oblong obtuse, the longer ones 3.5- 6.5(-7) X 0.7-1.5 mm, faintly l(-2)-nerved dorsally.
Inflorescence simply pseudoracemose or paniculate, well exserted from foliage, the capitula like those of M. setosa; bracts spatulate acute 3-5.5 X 0.7-1 mm, densely setose and stipitateglandular dorsally; flowers: the calyx including dense external setose pubescence (1.5-) 1.7-3 mm, the tube ±0.5 mm, concealed by vesture; corolla 4-5.2 mm, the narrowly funnelform tube glabrous or distally puberulent, the lobes 1-1.7 mm, finely setulose dorsally; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.9-1.4 mm, those of bisexual fls exserted 7.5-9 mm.
Pods when well fertilized (4.5-)5-8 cm x 6-7.5 mm, (4-)5-8-seeded, longattenuate both at base and apex, the stipe or sterile base of body and stipe together 6-16 mm, the tapering beak 9-15 mm, the undulately constricted replum 0.5-0.9 mm wide, the livid exocarp and palUd endocarp of valves together ±0.15 mm thick in section, the replum and valves alike villosulous, glandular-setulose and remotely setose, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles longer than wide, those at mid-pod 6-11 mm long; seeds subvertically basipetal, broadly ovate-suborbicular in broad outline, ±4.3 x 3.4 mm, the testa smooth lustrous.
In cerrado and becoming weedy in disturbed ground and on waysides, ±650-1000 m, discontinuously widespread from Sa. do Roncador in e. Mato Grosso e. to s. Espigao Mestre in s.-w. Bahia, s. through centr. and s. Goias and Distrito Federal to 19°S in the Triangulo of Minas Gerais, endemic to the Brazilian Planalto.—Fl.
V-VIII. Map 30.
Mimosa melanocarpa closely resembles M. setosa, from which it is most easily and reliably distinguished by the extemally setose calyx.
The MIMOSA CALICIADENIA MIMOSA MELANOCARPA I dJ MAP 30.
Planaltine Brazil.
Ranges of M. caliciadenia Bameby and M. melanocarpa Bentham. leaflets are mostly smaller and more crowded, and the pod more pronouncedly stipitate, breaking up into proportionately longer articles.
All flowering collections of M. melanocarpa known to me were made in the dry autumn and early winter months of May to July, whereas almost all collections of flowering M. setosa are dated between late September and March.
This asynchrony in flowering may preserve the identity of the species where they are sympatric.
223.
Mimosa caliciadenia Bameby, sp. nov., ab affini M. setosa subsp. paludosa foliis simplicioribus necnon legumine abbreviato pauciarticulato tenuius chartaceo diversa, foliorum majorum pinnis 4-7 (nec 6-17)-jugis, pinnarum longiomm foliolis 16-22 (nec 27-42)-jugis, leguminis 2-3.4 (nec 3.5-6.5) cm longi replo angusto 0.6-0.7 mm lato diagnoscenda.— Brazil.
Minas Gerais: in cerrado interspersed with outcrops, 900 m, Sa. do Espinha90 ±18 km e. of Diamantina, 16.
III.1970, Irwin (with Fonseca, Souza, Reis dos Santos & Ramos) 27700.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, GH, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Slender prickly and viscid, diffiise or decumbent shrub or weak treelet with pliant purplish stems to 3 m, these and lf-stks at once stipitateglandular, finely villosulous in lines, and armed with scattered, antrorsely curved brownish-stramineous aculei to 1-2.5 mm, the glandular setulae ±0.3-0.5 mm tall with cupular orange head 0.2-0.3 mm diam., the facially glabrous lfts thinly setuloseor glandular-ciliolate, the many globose capitula axillary to fully expanded and coevally expanding lvs, until just prior to anthesis conelike and golden-setose.
Stipules very early caducous (scarcely known), apparently lanceacuminate ± 4 x 1 mm, pubescent like the adjacent stem.
Leaf-stalks slender, distally tapering (3.5-)4.5-l 1.5 cm, the petiole including (or consisting of) livid wrinkled pulvinus 2-12 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 11-21 mm, the first one 0.4-1.1 mm diam., the narrow ventral groove interrupted between most pinna-pairs by a subulate-acicular spicule less than 1 mm; pinnae 4- 6(-7)-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis oflonger ones 1.5-5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 16-22-jug., the first pair 0.3-1.4 mm distant from subulate paraphyUidia, aU in outline Unear-oblong obtuse, the longer ones 5.5-8.5 x 1.2-1.8 mm, the plane lustrous blades veinless above, the centric midrib fainUy perceptible beneath.
Peduncles solitary or geminate, at anthesis subfiUform (2-)2.5-5 cm; capitula without fUaments 9-10 mm diam.; bracts spatulate 4-5.5 mm, the blade densely goldensetose dorsally, eglandular, contracted into a slender glabrous claw; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, only a few distal ones bisexual, the rest staminate; calyx campanulate 0.4-0.6 mm, glabrous extemally, the rim with a few plain or gland-tipped setulae 0.2-0.4 mm; corolla narrowly funnelform 3.4-4.3 mm glabrous, the lobes 0.8-0.9 mm, at tip thickened and greenish; filaments pink, monadelphous through ±1 mm, exserted to 7-10.5 mm.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, the oblong planocompressed body 20-34 x 7-9 mm, abruptly contracted at base into a stipe 2- 2.5 mm and at apex into an erect cusp 5-7 mm, the replum 0.6-0.7 mm wide, shallowly constricted between 3-5 seeds, distantly armed with aculeoli to 0.3-0.5 mm, the livid-purplish or - castaneous lustrous valves not over 0.1-0.15 mm thick in section, low-bullate over each seed and there with a few scattered gland-tipped setulae, when ripe papery, separating from replum and breaking up into broadly elliptic-quadrilateral segments 6-8 mm long; seeds (few seen) compressed-ellipsoid ±5.5 X 3.5 mm, the testa fuscous lustrous.
In cerrado about rock-outcrops near 900 m, known only from the high e. slope of Sa. do Espinha90 e. of Diamantina, at ± 18°10'S in centr. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-R. II-IV(-?).
Map 30.
Mimosa caliciadenia may be a local derivative of widespread M. setosa subsp. paludosa, which it resembles in viscid and prickly vesture and in small heads of flowers glabrous except for a few minute setulae on rim of calyx.
It differs, however, in relatively few distant pinnae and fewer leaflets (as recounted in the foregoing diagnosis), and in the shorter, but not narrower, therefore proportionately broader, few-seeded, thinly setulose and not viscid-villosulous pod.
Mimosa adenocarpa has similar leaf-formula, but smaller leaflets, gland-tipped corollas subtended by minute bracts, pods less than half as wide, and much smaller seeds.
The epithet caliciadenia refers to the relatively large stalked cupshaped glands that suggest the stalked mazedium of the lichen Calicium.
It is appropriate to mention here specimens in bud (Irwin 28567.
NY) from near S. Joao da Chapada north of Diamantina, which have the unusually stout capitate-glandular setae of M. caliciadenia combined with the leaf-formula of M. setosa subsp. paludosa, but capitula densely golden-setose prior to anthesis.
I have referred them provisionally to M. setosa subsp. paludosa sensu lato, but I suspect that they represent a distinct taxon.
223bis.
Mimosa acroconica Bameby, sp. nov., habitu indumentoque cum M. caliciadenia arete congruens, sed foliis sessilibus (primum pinnamm par juxta folii pulvinum ipsum oritur) et stipulis magnis chartaceis, ad inflorescentiae junioris apicem imbricatis, capitula nascentia nidulantibus et conum efformantibus certe diversa.—BrazU.
Minas Gerais: Mvm.
Joaquim Felicio, in campo rupestre at ± 1000 m, Sa. do Cabral, 17°42'S, 44°14'W, 12.11.1988 (fl), J. R. Pirani (with W. W. Thomas, R. Mello-Silva & J. B. Fernandes) 2225. —Holotypus, SPF 50683; isotypus, NY.
Openly branched, prickly and viscid, arborescent shrubs with incurved-ascending branches, attaining 4 m, armed on flowering stems and on back of lf-stks with few scattered, horizontal or widely acroscopic, yellowish aculei ±1-2 mm, the stems in addition densely finely villous with erect shining hairs less than 0.5 mm and hispid with many erect, gland-tipped setae 0.5-1.5 mm and a few scattered, tapering eglandular ones, the foliage olivaceous subconcolorous, the lfts facially glabrous or almost so, minutely ciUolate, the relatively loose capitula solitary and paired in the axils of a succession of coevally expanding lvs, when very young subtended and concealed by a cone of ample papery stipular bracts, the inflorescence paniculate, openly foliate.
Stipules caducous from a wide lunate scar, all fallen from developed lvs and from base of peduncles at anthesis, those subtending nascent capitula papery-membranous, ovate-acuminate, dorsally gibbous, 6.5-12 x 4-8 mm, the blade silky-pilosulous but eglandular dorsally, glabrous and finely several-nerved within.
Leaves sessile, the short first pair of pinnae directly next to discolored pulvinus, the rachis of lvs below the inflorescence 5-16 cm (upper lvs shorter and simpler, no further described), the longer interpinnal segments 8-12(-l 5) mm, the ventral sulcus narrow, bridged and minutely spiculate between pinnapairs; pinnae 5-14-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of distal pair 2.5-3.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-1.5 mm; lfts of distal pinnae ±17-24(-28)-jug., little graduated, the first pair close beyond minute subulate paraphyllidia, the blades narrowly oblong from shallowly semicordate base, broadly rounded at apex, the largest 5-7.5 X 1.7-2 mm, all almost veinless above, beneath 3^-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric, finely 1-2-branched well above midblade, the inner posterior nerve produced nearly to blade apex, the margin plane.
Peduncles 2.5- 4 cm; capitula plumply ellipsoid or ovoid, prior to anthesis conelike, without filaments to 12 x 9 mm diam., the slenderly clavate receptacle to 7.5 X 1.2 mm; bracts elliptic-oblanceolate 3-5 X 1-1.5 mm, surpassing but scarcely concealing the obovoid obtuse, subglabrous fl-buds, early deciduous, the claw glabrous, the thin-textured blade brownish, dorsally pilosulous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, many lower ones staminate; calyx shallowly campanulate ±0.5 mm, the membranous tube extemally glabrous, the lowdeltate lobes randomly minutely setulose-ciliolate; corolla broadly turbinate but contracted at base into a neck nearly 0.5 mm, that of longer flowers 3.5-4.1 mm, the broadly deltate-ovate, pink, 1-nerved lobes ±1-1.2 x 1-1.2 mm; filaments bright pink, monadelphous through ±0.7 mm, exserted 10-11.5 mm; ovary setiUose; ovules ±6; pod not known.
In campo rupestre at ±1000 m, known only from Sa. do Cabral, near 17°40'S in centr. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-R. II-III(-?).
Mimosa acroconica is clearly related to M. caliciadenia, of which it has the armament of scattered aculei and the pin-shaped setae concave and resiniferous at tip, but differs in two striking particulars: truly sessile leaves; and extraordinary dilated stipules, the papery sheath of which falls precociously from a lunate scar.
The similar bractUke stipules that subtend nascent capitula are imbricate at the tip of inflorescence branchlets into a loose cone of scales much like that seen in some species of Desmodium, but unexpected in Mimosa.
It is to this feature that the epithet alludes.
I am much indebted to Dr. J. R. Pirani for the loan and gift of the type material.
224.
Mimosa accedens Bameby, sp. nov., affinitatis verae inter Setosas et Pachycarpas abstmsae, his indiciis distinctissima: caules herbacei e xylopodio, setis patuUs 3-9 mm usque longis hispidi; folia pauca dissita elongata ac angusta, pinnis plemmque 15-30-jugis rachique longiorum 15-38 mm usque longo, foliolis saepe 14-30-jugis 2.5-5 mm usque longis; legumen basi in stipitem 2.5-4 mm longum contractum lato-lineare 60-70 x 9-11 mm, replo lato sed valvulis setosis ac viscido-setulosis demum in articulos 9-11 dissolutis. —Brazil.
Distrito Federal: 30 km from Gama on road to rio Commba, 16.
X.1963 (fr), /.
M. Pires in Maguire 57770.—Holotypus, UB; isotypus, NY.
M. affinis Harms ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 185.
1906, nom. nud.-"Fazenda dos Porcos .. .
Goyaz, Glaziou 21044.''Specimina authent.,
+B = F Neg. 1395\ C! G! K (misnumbered 21043)\ LE! P!-NonM affinisB.
L. Robinson, 1891.
M. setosa sensu Bentham, 1876: 387, ex parte, quoad Burchell 6022, 7507, caet. exclus.
Erect subshrub from xylopodium, the simple stems 4-8 dm x 2-3.5 mm clothed with relatively few, long and narrow multifoliolate lvs, hispid throughout or almost so with fine tapering yellowish setae to 3-9 mm and also villosulous with fine short whitish hairs intermixed with smaU gland-tipped setulae, the sublustrous lfts faciaUy glabrous but ciliolate and remotely setose around the margin, the subglobose capitula solitary and geminate in If-axils, the first below or near midstem, rarely a few pseudoracemose and exserted late in season.
Stipules erect, narrowly lanceor Unear-attenuate 7-13 x 0.6-1.2 mm, ± 5-nerved.
Leaf-stalk of lvs near mid-stem 7-16 cm (of some early and some far distal lvs shorter, no further described), the petiole 5-10 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 7-9 mm; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae (12-)15-30(-34)-jug., except for shorter proximal ones subequilong, the rachis of longer ones 15-38 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (12-)14- 26(-38)-jug., the first pair 0.3-1 mm distant from minute subulate paraphyllidia, the blades narrowly oblong obtuse, straight or almost so, the longer ones 2.5-5 x 0.75-1.3(-1.5)mm, thefirm blades veinless above, beneath bluntly 2-3- nerved from pulvinule, the centric midrib weakly 1-2-branched below middle.
Peduncles (2-)2.5- 5.5 cm; capitula without filaments 8-9 mm diam.. prior to anthesis moriform but hispidulous; bracts linear-oblanceolate 2-4 x 0.2-0.3 mm, setoseciliate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, except for sometimes ciUolate calyx glabrous, the lower ones staminate, the rest bisexual and a little longer; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.5-0.6 mm, obscurely lobulate; corolla turbinate or vase-shaped 3-4.5 mm, the ovate subacute 1-nerved almost plane lobes 1.3-2 mm; filaments pink or fading whitish, monadelphous through ±0.5-0.8 mm, exserted 7-9.5 mm.
Pods ascending, 1-2 per capitulum, the stipe 2.5-4 mm, the broadly linear body 60-70 x 9-11 mm, at once setose and glandular-setulose overall, the stout replum 1-1.5 mm wide, the lustrous castaneous, firmly papery valves low-convex over each seed, breaking up when ripe into 9-11 transversely oblong articles 5-7 mm long; seeds ±5 x 3.5 mm, the lustrous smooth testa brown or atrocastaneous.
On stony campo within the cerrado climax association, 950-1050 m, local about the sources of rios Corumba and S. Marcos in lat. 15°40'- 17°30'S, Distrito Federal and adj. s.-e. Goias, BrazU.-n. VIII-X; fr.
IX-I. The first collections of M. accedens, namely Burchell 6022 (K) from between Lages and Urutai and 7507 (K) from between Macacos and Olho d'Agua, dating back to 1828, were mistaken by Bentham for M. setosa.
From this M. accedens differs in simple, notably long-setose stems that die back annually to the rootstock, in proportionately long narrow leaves lacking interpinnal spicules, in the mostly lateral and axillary, not pseudoracemose peduncles, and further, from sympatric var. setosa, in the glabrous or only minutely ciliolate calyx.
It was recognized as distinct, but never formally described, by Harms from a collection made by Glaziou in early 1895 in the present Federal District.
Harms's epithet affinis being preoccupied in Mimosa, I have substituted accedens, suggested by the apparent affinity to M. setosa.
224bis.
Mimosa aguapeia Bameby, sp. nov., habitu et pube e pilis minutis molUbus, setis attenuatis scaberulis, et setis gracillimis glanduloso-capitatis constanti M. orbignyanae ut videtur proxima, ab ea (ut ab affini M. riedelii, eglandulosa) foliorum majorum pinnis 3-6-, nec 17-18-jugis, foliolisque majoribus 14-19, nec 4.5-10 mm usque longis valde diversa.— Brazil.
Mato Grosso: Serra do Aguapei, 700 m, 16°02'S, 59°30'W, 10.
VIII.1978 (fl, fr), /.
M. Pires (with M. R. Santos) 76572.-Holotypus MG = NY Neg. 12445.-Ibid.,
16°10'S, 59°25'W, 11.
VIII. 1978 (fl), /.
M. Pires 76577.—Paratypus, MG.
Erect, coarsely fewand large-lvd, unarmed, virgate subshrubs ± 1 mm tall, finely puberulent throughout, the stiff few-branched stems in addition densely pubescent with narrowly ascending and subappressed, scaberulous flagelliform setae to ±0.8-1 mm and the axes of inflorescence and the pods fiuther viscid with fine patent glandtipped setae to 1-2 mm, the plane thick-textured, dull leaden-green lfts puberulent on both faces, sometimes also setulose dorsally and always setose-ciliolate, the inflorescence a few-branched efoUate panicle of pseudoracemes rising far above the foliage, the fls globosely capitate.
Stipules firm, ovate acute 5-9 x 2 ^ .
5 mm, densely appressedsetose dorsally, glabrous striate within, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 6-16 cm, the petiole 1.5- 4 cm, at middle 2-3 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 1.5-2.5 cm, obscurely grooved ventrally, interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae 3-6-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of longest pair 7-12 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 4-6 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 17-22-jug., except the very lowest subequilong, the first pair 2-3 mm from firm lanceolate paraphyllidia 1.5-2.5 mm, the blades obliquely lance-oblong from shallowly semi-cordate or -rounded base, at apex deltately acute mucronulate, the larger ones 14-19 x 5- 6.5 mm, all 4-nerved from pulvinule, the almost straight midrib forwardly displaced to divide blade ±1:2, weakly ±3-branched at and beyond middle, the inner posterior primary nerve incurved-ascending to anastomosis beyond midblade, the outer ones progressively shorter, the whole venation almost immersed on upper face, bluntly prominulous beneath.
Peduncles mostly 2-3 per node of inflorescence, at anthesis ±10 mm, in fruit to 18 mm; capitula prior to anthesis conelike, densely silky-setose, at anthesis without filaments 7-8.5 mm diam., the clavate receptacle less than 2 mm; bracts oblance-elliptic 2.5-3.8 X 0.8-1 mm, silky-barbate dorsally, deciduous with the fls; flowers sessile, 4-merous 8-androus, white, so far as observed all bisexual; calyx pappiform, the tube 0.3-0.5 mm, barbate extemally and ciliate, including the fringe of hairs 2-2.4 mm; corolla slenderly trumpet-shaped 3.5- 4 mm, the tube glabrous, the ovate cupular lobes 1 X 0.8 mm, densely silky dorsally; filaments united into a stemonozone ± 1 mm, exserted ± 6 mm; ovary shortly stipitate, pUosulous.
Pods 2- 10 per capitulum, sessile, undulately linear in profile, straight, 35-50 x 6 mm, 5-8-seeded, the replum 0.5-0.7 mm wide, densely ascending-setose and stipitate-glandular, the stiffly papery valves setose like replum, becoming low-convex over each seed, when ripe breaking up into individually dehiscent segments 6-7.5 mm long; seeds compressed-lentiform, in broad view ±5 X 3.5 mm, the testa lustrous brown, minutely pitted, the hippocrepiform pleurogram 3.5 x 2 mm.
In grassy places Cvegeta9ao de capim') at ± 700 m, known only from Sa. do Aguapei (=Sa. da Pedra) in s.-w. comer of Mato Grosso, Brazil.— H. VI-VIII. Mimosa aguapeia constitutes a link in the replacement series of species endemic to isolated sandstone tablelands about the sources of the Paraguay river.
It resembles both of the following species in habit, and M. orbignyana especially in the indumentum of fine pin-shaped gland-tipped setulae on the inflorescence axis and on the fruit, but is clearly different from both in the many fewer pinnae and much larger leaflets, as given in the foregoing key and in the Latin diagnosis.
I am indebted to the Director of the Herbarium of Museu Goeldi, Belem, for the loan of the specimens cited.
225.
Mimosa riedelii Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 91.
1846.-"Serra da Chapada, [=Chapada dos Guimaraes, Mato Grosso], Brazil, Riedel.'' -holotypus, Riedel 491 = 962, collected V.1827 (fl), K! = NY Neg. 1909; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1392\ GH! K! LE (3 sheets)! = NY Neg. 11674, P! M. riedelii sensu Bentham, 1876: 387 (but not from Minas Gerais).
Habit and stature not positively demonstrated by specimens seen, but apparently a stout virgate, fewbut ample-lvd subshrub attaining 1 m or more, the simple stem and long lf-stks densely coarsely setose with erect scaberulous tapering or flagelliform setae 0.8-2.5 mm, passing upward into a candelabriform efoliate panicle of subspiciform pseudoracemes elevated 4-6 dm above foUage, the axes of inflorescence canescently silkysetose with finer but also scaberulous flagelliform setae to 2-2.5 mm, the firm, plane-margined but dorsally shaUow-concave lfts glabrous and dull livid-gray on both faces, or paler brown beneath.
Stipules (scarcely known) ovate or broadly lanceolate, some to 6-11 x 2-4 mm, the subcoriaceous blade densely setulose dorsally, glabrous within, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 16-38 cm, the short petiole 2.5-3 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 10-16 mm, the narrow ventral groove continuous between pinna-pairs (spicules 0); pinnae 18-28-jug., subdecrescent at each end of lfstk, the forwardly curved rachis of longer ones 5.5-10 cm, the interfoliolar segments to 1.1-2.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 33-42-jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair close to subulate paraphyllidia less than 1 mm, all obUquely ovate obtuse or deltately subacute from semicordate base, those near mid-rachis 4.5-10 X 2.5-3.8 mm, 1.6-2.8 times as long as wide, all smooth veinless above, beneath 3-4-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, weakly 2—4-branched, the inner posterior nerve almost to blade apex, the outer ones much shorter.
Peduncles solitary and geminate 6-10 mm; capitula subglobose, without filaments 8-10 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike and densely silky-setose; bracts elliptic-oblanceolate ±4 X 0.8 mm, densely setose dorsally upward from near middle; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx pappiform 2.5-3 mm, the lobes decompound to within 0.4-0.7 mm of base into setae to nearly 2 mm; corolla narrowly turbinate "red and pink," 3.6-3.8 mm, the tube glabrous, the ovate, scarcely thickened lobes 1.2-1.6 x 0.7-0.9 mm, setulose dorsally; filaments pink, united at base through ±0.5 mm, exserted 5.5- 7 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods (not seen fully mature) 1-6 per capitulum sessile, in profile undulately linear 4 0 ^ 5 x 6.5 mm, 5-8-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.5-0.6 mm wide, the papery valves less than 0.1 mm thick in section, not differentiated into exoand endocarp, the replum and valves alike silky-barbate overall with slender ascending, microscopically scabemlous, cream-colored flageUiform setae to 2-2.5 mm, the valves breaking up transversely into (presumably free-faUing) low-biconvex articles ±1 mm long; seeds unknown.
In seasonaUy dry campo, probably near or above 700 m, known only from Chapada dos Guimaraes, near 15°30'S on the Amazon-Parana watershed in s.-centr. Mato Grosso, BrazU.-Fl. ±V-VII; fr. late VI(-?).
For a discussion of the relationships of M riedelii, seeM. or^/^wyawa (immediately foUowing).
226.
Mimosa orbignyana Bameby, sp. nov., M. riedelii affinis et cum ea setis caulinis scaberulis, inflorescentia paniculata necnon leguminis (craspedii) forma congma, sed petiolis communibus brevioribus (1.5 dm usque, nec 1.5-4 dm longis) pinnis longioribus 3.5-5 (nec 5.5-10) cm usque longis, foliolis pinnamm majomm ±20 (nec 33-42)-jugis, peduncuUs 1.5-3.5 (nec 0.6-1) cm longis, et legumine setis glanduloso-capitellatis crebre viscido-hispido diversa. —Bolivia, Chiquitos [verosimiliter juxta Sta. Cmz de la Sierra], VIII. 1831 (fl, fr jun), A. C V. d'Orbigny 7^J.—Holotypus, P = NY Neg. 77520.
Unarmed, amply microphyllidious shrubs of unrecorded stature, the stems and lf-stks hispidpilose with incurved-ascending, basally dilated, sordid scaberulous setae to ± 1.5 mm, mixed with minute puberulence but no gland-tipped setulae, the brunnescent foliage subconcolorous, the lfts thinly puberulent on both faces and some randomly strigose beneath, discontinuously finely setose-ciliate, the inflorescence a panicle of efoliate pseudoracemes 1-2.5 dm, each from a If-axil, the peduncles densely silky-pilose with longer flagelliform, distally smooth setae.
Stipules subcoriaceous erect triangular-lanceolate 4.5-6 x 1.5-2 mm, densely setose dorsally, glabrous within, disjointing in age.
Leaf-stalks to 15 cm, the petiole including hard obese pulvinus ± 8 - 12 X 1.5-2 mm, the interpinnal segments 5-8 mm, the ventral groove obscure; spicules 0; pinnae ± 17-21-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 3.5-5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-2.5 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 18-21-jug., subequilong, the first pair less than 1 mm distant from pulvinus or from minute paraphyllidia concealed by setae, the thick-textured plane blades obliquely ovate-elliptic from broadly semi-cordate base, obtuse at apex, the longer ones 4.5-6.5 x 1.7-2.1 mm, 2.7-3.3 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 1(- 2)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, only weakly prominulous, the one posterior nerve short, faint or obsolete.
Peduncles mostly geminate 1.5-3.5 cm; capitula subglobose, without filaments 9-10 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike silky-pilose; receptacle densely setose; bracts linear-lanceolate 3.5-5 x 0.4-0.7 mm, densely setose and sparingly glandular-setulose dorsally from base upward, deciduous;y/ovv^r^ 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; pedicels to 0.3 mm, setose; calyx pappiform 2.7-3 mm, decompound to within 0.3 mm of base into fine setae; coroUa funnelform 4—4.2 mm, the tube glabrous to middle, the ovate 1 -nerved, shallowly convex lobes 1-1.5 x 0.7-1 mm, setose-barbellate dorsally; filaments pink, monadelphous through ± 1 mm, exserted 5-6 mm.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) several per capitulum subsessile, in profile undulately linear ±30-35 X 5 mm, 3-5-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum ±0.5 mm wide, densely hispid with slender vertical straight gland-tipped setae varying from 0.5 to 2.5 mm, the Uvid thin-textiued valves likewise densely hispid but with partly plain setae, low-colliculate over each seed and transversely cracked between them, presumably breaking up into free-falling articles, these elliptic or quadrate 6-10 mm long; seeds unknown.
In unknown habitat, but to be sought in campo or cerrado at or above 700 m on Sa. de Santiago, near 18°30'S in s.-e. Santa Cmz, Bolivia.—Fl.
VIII-IX(-?).
Bentham annotated the type of M. orbignyana as ^^Mimosa: Ameria Pachycarpae sp. nov.," but left it undescribed.
Like M. riedelii, its analogue on the sandstone caprock of Chapada dos Guimaraes in Mato Grosso, M. orbignyana has the ample multifoliolate leaves and general aspect of ser. Pachycarpae, but the pods of both are thintextured craspedia with relatively narrow replum and valves cracking between seeds even before full maturity.
In this feature, and in the paniculate inflorescence and form of calyx, these two species seem more closely akin to M. setosa, although easily set apart by the scaberulous cauline setae and range of dispersal far distant to the west.
While many common features denote a close relationship between M. riedelii and M. orbignyana, the differences in leaf-formula, in length of peduncles and in vesture of the pod, summarized in the diagnosis, are specifically distinctive.
The floristic relationship between Chapada dos Gmmaraes in Mato Grosso and Sa. de Santiago in Bolivia, situated respectively on the east and west periphery of the upper Paraguai basin, is further exemplified by the two species of Eumimosa, M. bipennatula and M. jacobita.
The chapada and the sierra are remnants of ancient sandstone caprock perhaps once continuous across what is now the valley of rio Paraguay.
The possibility of a link beween these isolated floras on the heights of Sa. do Aguapei, near the Brazil-Bolivia border at 16°S, cries for investigation.
D(ii).
Series PACHYCARPAE Bentham Mimosa sect. Habbasia ser. Pachycarpae Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 439.
1875 & in Martius, ¥1. bras. 15(2): 385.
1876.
M. sect. Ameria ser. Pachycarpae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 404.
1842.—Sp. lectotypica: M. pachycarpa Bentham = M. foliolosa var. pachycarpa (Bentham) Bameby.
M. sect. Ameria Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 403.
1842, ex parte, quoad ser. Pachycarpas, hoc loco seriem lectotypicam designatam.
M. sect. Ameria ser. AntrorsaeBentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 403.
1842.—Sp. unica: M. antrorsa Bentham.—M. sect. Habbasia ser. Adversae Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 439.
1875, nom. illeg. Trees (sometimes pachycaul), shrubs and subshrubs, highly diverse in stature and attitude of stems, mostly unarmed but 2 spp. (M. adenotricha, M. antrorsa) antrorsely aculeate, the lvs mostly amply microphyllidious.
Pubescence potentially or actually triple, composed of short plain hairs, tapering or flagelliform, often basally thickened setae, and gland-tipped set(ul)ae, the 3 types of trichome independently variable in length and density but some plain setae always present, viscid ones sometimes lacking.
Stipules lanceolate or broadly triangular, exceptionally much dilated and striately nerved, the nerves in most spp. immersed.
Leaf-formula (iii-)iv-xliv/ (10-) 14-65, if the ;7z>z«fl^ less than 10-jug. then lfts of larger pinnae 14-jug. upward; interpinnal spicules usually 0, present in few spp. (Mm. dominarum, splendida, irwinii, maguirei, ulei).
Flowers densely capitate, the capitula globose, ellipsoid, or rarely clavate, without filaments 6-20 (in M. psetuiofoliolosa only 4-5) mm diam.; fls basically 4-merous 8-androus, the small membranous, short-toothed or tmncate calyx either setose-ciliate or glabrous, the narrowly turbinate to subcylindric corolla (2.5-)3-8(-10) mm, the pink filaments connate through (0.3-)0.45-1.5 mm.
Fruits mostly sessile, in profile oblong, Unear-oblong or elliptic, the non-indented replum 1-7 mm wide, the firm-textured valves separating entire from replum and valvately recurving from apex downward to release the seeds.
Spp. ±40, several multiracial and of controversial definition, several poorly known and in need of confirmation, confined to interior e. Brazil, where characteristic of cerrado and campo rupestre associations above 400 m^ most abundant and diverse in centr. and s. Goias (including Distrito Federal) and in Sa. do Espinha90 in Minas Gerais, extending weakly n. to s.-centr. Bahia, s. to S. Paulo, w. to s. Mato Grosso.
The series Pachycarpae is a complex group that defies neat definition, due partly to abrupt modifications of growth-habit, stature, leaf-formula, indumentum, and rhythms of flowering, and partly to existence of armed and unarmed forms similar in other respects.
Its single diagnostic feature is a tough-walled, valvately dehiscent pod girdled by a non-indented replum at least 1 mm and to 7 mm wide.
Comparable valvate methods of seed-release have developed independently in: a) M. (ser. Bipinnatae) brachycarpa, coinciding with the narrow replum, small flowers, and striate nerved corolla proper to its group; b) several members of ser. Stipellares, associated with the broad paraphyllidia and short corolla characteristic of the series; and c) some haplostemonous mimosas of sect. Mimosa ser. Myriophyllae, Microcarpae, and Dolentes.
The evolutionary advantage of the valvate pod, which owes its mechanical properties to thickened (often livid) exocarp and crustaceous endocarp of the pod's wall, is not obvious.
Seed-dispersal by the censer method is clearly less efficient than by dissolution of the fruit into the free-falling oneseeded propagules prevalent in the genus.
The majority of Pachycarpae, however, are adapted to high campo and rupestral habitats of limited, often extremely narrow extent, so that an effective method for wide random seed-dispersal outside the habitat might be for them more wasteful than productive.
From another viewpoint lack of random dispersal may be a factor in the dense local endemism of the series on the rock-piles of Chapada dos Veadeiros in Goias.
It might be conjectured that thickened pod-valves provide protection to the swelling ovules that the papery envelope of the average craspedium does not; but it is no security against Bmchidae, which gain access to the ovules long before the valves thicken in texture and which afflict the Pachycarpae no less than other mimosae.
When Bentham first came across valvate dehiscence in Mimosa he segregated the species so characterized into a section Ameria.
Later, finding that continuous valves appeared in disparate branches of the genus both in North and South America, he abandoned this sectional character.
There can be no question that the Ameria condition has arisen separately in several different lines of heredity, but for ser. Pachycarpae it remains a crucial unifying character.
I here include in ser. Pachycarpae the two armed species, M. adenotricha and M. antrorsa, that Bentham segregated as the autonomous ser. Antrorsae (or later Adversae).
Each of these appears most closely related to an approximately or actually sympatric variety of M. foliolosa, the first to M. foliolosa subsp. foliolosa var. franciscana (or perhaps var. viscidula), the second to subsp. brevibractea var. brevibractea.
I suspect that the armature of antrorse aculei was independently acquired in each case.
Bentham certainly overemphasized the significance (or perhaps merely the utility in classification) of armament in Mimosa, but it must not be forgotten that he had no foreknowledge of the many instances of aculeate and non-aculeate states or varieties now known to exist in both sects.
Mimosa and Batocaulon.
Reliance on the fruit as the single definitive character of ser. Pachycarpae involves the inconvenient fact that flowering material can be determined to series only by hit-and-miss methods, the more so because the plants are more conspicuous when in flower and more often collected in that condition than in fruit.
Mistakes are easily made.
Bentham, lacking the tell-tale craspedium, described as Pachycarpae two members of ser. Setosae (M. setosa itself, and M. riedelii).
Species found in the range of ser. Pachycarpae most likely to be mistaken for members of that series are some Setosae (especially M. setosa itself), some Habbasiae, and some Bipinnatae, species with at least partly setose indumentum and subglobose capitula.
Most Pachycarpae, and all common ones, lack interpinnal spicules on leaf-stalk, have corollas with rare exceptions 3 mm long and longer, and have filaments monadelphous for at least 0.5 mm.
The planaltine mimosas that mimic Pachycarpae in ample foliage either have pronounced interpinnal spicules, or corollas less than 3 mm long, or filaments united only at very base.
These contrasts are not universal, but may forestall many errors in identification.
See further in remarks under ser. Glandulosae and Setosae.
In the following pages I have ordered the Pachycarpae, as well as my perceptions and a linear arrangement permit, into a hierarchy of specialization expressed in terms of growth-form and increasing flower-size.
The erect, conventionally shrubby or subshrubby, smaU-flowered M. foliolosa with extended leafy stems and extended inflorescence-axes appears the least specialized of Pachycarpae.
From it and close kindred I derive the prostrate, smaU-flowered species allied to M. prorepens, and the wandlike lifeform, exemplified by M. eriorrhachis and M. cryptothamnos, in which the leaves are reduced in number but increased in size and concentrated below midstem.
These last have relatively large capitula and pass by imperceptible steps into the coarse, large-leaved, fruticose and arborescent relatives of M. claussenii.
In another direction an arborescent line culminates on one hand in the species with exfoliating bark akin to M. setosissima and on another in the pachycaul rosette-trees of Chapada dos Veadeiros.
Slenderly arborescent M. maguirei, stout wandlike glabrate M. ulei, and acaulescent M. speciosissima and M. irwinii, with stipules bearded in fiery orange setae, may be detached byproducts of one or more of these evolutionary lines but are morphologically isolated and not readily assimUated in any particular group.
The following conspectus of ser. Pachycarpae summarizes my views on interspecific relationships within the series.
Conspectus of ser. Pachycarpae Mimosa * Growth-form unspecialized, the leafy stems extended and capitula relatively small.
227. foliolosa Bentham I. suhsp. foliolosa a. var. pubescens Bentham b. var. franciscana Bameby c. \ar. foliolosa d. var. brevipinna (Bentham) Bameby e. var. corpulenta Bameby II. subsp. pachycarpa (Bentham) Bameby a. var. multipinna (Bentham) Bameby b. var. cercadoensis Bameby c. var. foederalis Bameby d. var. gravida Bameby e. var. pachycarpa f. var. viscidula Bameby g. var. vernicosa (Bentham) Bameby h. var. peregrina Bameby III. subsp. brevibractea Bameby a. var. brevibractea b. var. paranani Bameby c. var. antana Bameby d. var. rigens Bameby 227bis. [indecora Bameby, nom. nud.] 228. pachycarpoides Malme 229. auriberbis Bameby 230. rava Bameby 231. leiocephala Bentham 232. nitens Bentham ** As the preceding, but stems humifuse; capitula of M. psetuiofoliolosa very small, suggesting sect. Batocaulon ser. Paucifoliatae.
233. lithoreas Bameby 234. humivagans Bameby 235. prorepens Bameby 236. pseudofoliolosa Bameby 9|C9|CV \ o ^ As *, but stems antrorsely aculeate.
237. antrorsa Bentham 238. adenotricha Bentham **** Growth-form tending to be wandlike, with few basal or subbasal lvs and inflorescence efoliate at anthesis; capitula generally wider than in all preceding.
239. albolanata Taubert a. var. brasiliana Bameby b. var. albolanata c. var. paucipinna (Bentham) Bameby d. var. grossiceps Bameby 240. eriorrhachis Bameby 241. cryptothamnos Bameby ***** Growth-form of *, but plants taller and coarser, with mostly longer peduncles and thicker capitula.
242. claussenii Bentham a. var. claussenii b. var. prorsiseta Bameby c. var. corneiseta Bameby d. var. vespertilionis Bameby e. var. megistophylla Bameby f. var. soderstromii Bameby g. var. microphyllidia Bameby h. var. pumila Bameby i. var. claviceps Bameby j. var. dolichocephala Bameby 242bis. [porphyrea Bameby, nom. nud.] 243. gardneri Bentham 244. stylosa Bameby 245. rheiptera Bameby 246. struthionoptera Bameby 247. longepedunculata Taubert ****** Like either * or ***** in growth-habit, but the epidermis of annoUnous stems peeling to expose cinnamonbrown underbark.
248. setosissima Taubert 249. decorticans Bameby 250. heringeri Bameby 251. densa Bentham a. var. densa b. var. alligantina Bameby 252. laniceps Bameby 253. pycnocoma Bentham 254. oligosperma Bameby ******* Like *****, but with greatly enlarged, multristriate stipules (Chapada dos Veadeiros only).
255. rhodostegia Bameby 256. regina Bameby ******** Pachycaul rosette-trees with condensed foliate axis at end of stout defoliate branches (Chapada dos Veadeiros only).
257. manidea Bameby 258. capito Bameby 259. oedoclada Bameby 260. dominarum Bameby ********* Stipules barbate with fiery red setae, but stature either of the last or sessile subshrubs with scapiform peduncles.
261. splendida Bameby 262. irwinii Bameby 263. speciosissima Taubert ********** Wandlike habit of****, but glabrate, with broad stipules and spiculate lf-stks; s. end of Chapada dos Veadeiros.
264. ulei Taubert a. var. ulei b. var. grallator Bameby *********** Slender arborescent shmbs with glaucescent stems, relatively few multifoliolate pinnae, spiculate lfstks, and caducous stipules; Sa. do Espinhago in centr. Minas Gerais.
265. maguirei Bameby 265bis.
M. sp. (Glaziou 19125) 265ter.
M. sp. (Irwin & Soderstrom 6016) Key to species of ser. Pachycarpae (and to some others likely to be sought here when lacking fruit) 1.
Stems armed with horizontal or antrorsely ascending aculei.
2.
Rachis of longer pinnae 25-80 mm and their lfts 26-55(-70)-jug. 3.
Indumentum of stems and pods appressed, strigose, eglandular; pod valvately dehiscent, strigose, eglandular 237.
M. antrorsa (p. 391).
3.
Indumentum of stems and pods pUosulous and stipitate-glandular; pod a craspedium; subsp. paludosa of: 221.
M. setosa (p. 352).
2.
Rachis of longer pinnae 15-25(-30) mm and their lfts 16-25-jug; pod valvately dehiscent but glandular-setulose 238.
M. adenotricha (p. 392).
1.
Stems unarmed.
4.
CoroUa-lobes glabrous extemally 5.
Primary axis of pseudoraceme humifuse, the obliquely or vertically heliotropic peduncles 4.5- 9.5 cm; w. Minas Gerais (Morro das Pedras) 233.
M. lithoreas (p. 388).
5.
Primary axis of pseudoraceme conventionally erect-ascending; Goias and Distrito Federal, one in centr. Minas Gerais.
6.
Petioles 4.5-33 cm.
7.
Openly branched shrubs 1.5-5 m of Sa. do Espinhago in Minas Gerais, the lvs scattered along the branches; stems livid and often glaucescent; stipules caducous long before the associated If; centr. Minas Gerais 265.
M. maguirei (p. 425).
7.
Wandlike subshrubs with few extremely large lvs at and near base of distally efoliate stems, these livid-castaneous non-glaucous; stipules persistent with expanded lvs; local in e.-centr. Goias 264.
M. ulei (p. 424).
6.
Petioles less than 2 cm; habit various.
8.
Pachycaul treelets with decorticate annotinous branches and congested inflorescence nestled in terminal If-rosette; corolla 6-7 mm; Chapada dos Veadeiros, e.-centr. Goias. ... 258.
M. capito (p. 417).
8.
Slender-stemmed shrubs and subshrubs with scattered lvs and with capitula either axillary or disposed in extended terminal pseudoracemes; corolla 3-4.5 mm; aUopatric.
9.
Capitula racemose, exserted from foliage; stems and lf-stks strigose with forwardly appressed setae to 1-1.5 mm; Sa. da Natividade in centr. Goias ... 231.
M leiocephala (p. 386).
9.
Capitula mostly axillary to an expanded If; stems and lf-stks hispid with fine erect yellowish setae to 3-9 mm; Distrito Federal and s.-e. Goias.
.
224.
M. accedens (p. 362).
4.
CoroUa-lobes hispidulous, setulose, or glandular-setulose extemally.
10.
Stipules barbate with orange-red setae to 6-12 mm.
11.
Erect pachycaul treelets 2-3 m; lf-stks spiculate between pinna-pairs 261.
M splendida (p. 421).
11.
Acaulescent or prostrate subshrubs, with lvs and peduncles arising from ground-level.
12.
Lvs and scapiform peduncles clustered at edge of broad xylopodium; stipules l-^ mm wide; no interpinnal spicules on lf-stk; longer lfts 5-8 mm; capitula subglobose; rim of calyx minutely ciliolate 263.
M. speciosissima (p. 423).
12.
Lvs and peduncles clustered at tip of humifuse woody trunk; stipules 3-9 mm wide; a spicule between each pair of pinnae; longer lfts 9-15 mm; capitula ellipsoid; rim of calyx strongly setose-ciliate 262.
M. irwinii (p. 422).
10.
Stipules strigose or pilose with pallid, yellowish, or bronzy setae almost always less than 6 mm, sometimes glabrate.
13.
Pinnae of larger lvs only 2-8-jug. 14.
Rachis of longer pinnae 6-11 cm and their longer lfts 8-14 mm; centr. Goias; shmbs 1.5-2 m, the homotinous stems hispid with rufous setae to 2-7 mm; pod thinly appressed-setose 232.
M. nitens (p. 387).
14.
Rachis of longer pinnae 2.5-5.5 cm and their longer lfts not over 6 mm; aUopatric.
15.
Stems 3-5 dm, hispid with ascending rufous setae to 2-3.5 mm; lfts villosulous on both faces; pod hispid with widely ascending rufous setae 2-4 mm; Distrito Federal 230.
M. rava (p. 385).
15.
Stems mostly 5-30 dm, appressed-strigose, stiffly ascending-hirsute, or glabrate; lfts glabrous facially.
16.
Lfts of longer pinnae 30-35-jug.; pod a hispid and glandular craspedium; rare in centr. Minas Gerais; var. rupigena of: 221.
M. setosa (p. 352).
16.
Lfts of longer pinnae 15-23(-27)-jug.; pod strigose with forwardly appressed comma-shaped setae scarcely over 1 mm, valvately dehiscent; common in Distrito Federal, adj. Goias, and transfranciscan Minas Gerais; war. foederalis of: 227.
M. foliolosa (p. 379).
13.
Pinnae of larger lvs 9-multi-jug. 17.
Setae of stems scabemlous; lfts notably asymmetrical, the displaced midrib dividing blade ±1:2; inflorescence a candelabriform panicle of pseudoracemes exserted 5 dm or more above expanded foliage; either s. Mato Grosso (Chapada dos Guimaraes) or s.-e. Bolivia; see couplet 7/7 in key to ser. Setosae (p. 350).
17.
Setae of stems smooth; lfts subsymmetrical, the midrib centric or almost so; inflorescence seldom branched, if so not far exserted; if sympatric with the last, the peduncles axiUary.
18.
Rachis of longer pinnae (6-)9-24(-25) mm; subshrubs and shrubs less than 15 dm with epidermis persistent on annotinous branches.
19.
Stems erect or stiffly ascending.
20.
Either the pinnae of longer lvs (17-)23-37-jug., or lfts of longer pinnae 20-44-jug., usually both at once; multiracial species widespread over the BraziUan Planalto; suhsp. foliolosa of: 227.
M. foliolosa (p. 373).
20.
Pinnae of longer lvs 10-20-jug., and lfts of longer pinnae 13-16-jug.; species very local in Distrito Federal and Mato Grosso.
21.
Pods ±55 X 15 mm, with replum 5-6 mm wide; setae of stems and lf-stks spurred at base; Chapada dos Guimaraes, s. Mato Grosso.
228.
M. pachycarpoides (p. 384).
21.
Pods 35-40 X 9-10 mm, with replum not over 1.5 mm wide; setae of stems and lf-stks basifixed; see note following M. foliolosa var. foederalis (p. 379).
19.
Stems humifuse; local species of s.-centr. Goias, in Sa.
Geral de Goias and the upper Corumba basin.
22.
Lvs petiolate, the tme petiole with pulvinus 4-11 mm; lfts oflonger pinnae 26-50-jug.; capitula without filaments 8-10 mm diam; n. and w. of Distrito Federal 235.
M. prorepens (p. 389).
22.
Lvs subsessile, the petiole with pulvinus only 1.5-3.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 10-18 mm; capitula without filaments 4-7 mm diam. 23.
Gland-tipped setae of stems to 0.8-1 mm; lf-formula xii-xvii/14-18; rachis of longer pinnae 7-10 mm and longest lfts less than 2 mm; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam.; calyx-tube 0.5-0.8 mm; immediately s. of Distrito Federal. .. 236.
M. pseudofoliolosa (p. 390).
23.
Gland-tipped setae of stems 0 or less than 0.5 mm; lf-formula viixii/10-15; rachis of longer pinnae 13-21 mm and largest lfts 3-5 mm; capitula withoutfilaments6-7 mm diam.; calyx-tube ±0.3 mm; Sa.
Geral n. of Distrito Federal 234.
M. humivagans (p. 389).
18.
Rachis of longer pinnae 25 mm long and more, exceptionally less than 25 mm only in some treelets with exfoliating epidermis of branchlets.
24.
Early arborescent shrubs and rosette-treelets (1.5-)2-4 m with cinnamon-brown underbark of annotinous branches exposed by exfoliation of epidermis pari passu with fall of lvs and stipules.
25.
A spicule between each pair of pinnae; indumentum at once setose and viscid-setose, the gland-tipped setae 1-3 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-7 cm; Chapada dos Veadeiros and perhaps in Distrito Federal 260.
M. dominarum (p. 420).
25.
No interpinnal spicules; if sympatric on Chapada dos Veadeiros the glandular element of indumentum shorter or absent and the pinna-rachises shorter.
26.
Orifice of calyx glabrous; Sa. dos Pireneus, Goias 248.
M. setosissima (p. 408).
26.
Orifice of calyx setulose or glandular-ciliolate; allopatric.
27.
Pod elliptic in profile, 14-20 x 9-12 mm, less than twice as long as wide, 4-5- seeded; local in centr. Goias (Niquelandia) 254.
M. oligosperma (p. 413).
27.
Pod narrowly oblong or linear-elliptic in profile, 30-55 x 10-15 mm, 3^.5 times as long as wide, when well fertilized more than 5-seeded.
28.
Fls and bracts short, the longest corollas (3-)3.5-4 mm, the bracts 1.8-3 mm, the capitula without filaments only 8-10 mm diam.; Tocantins-Parana watershed in lat. 13-15°S. 29.
Longer lf-stks 5-9 cm and rachis of longer pinnae 1.6-2.5 cm; longest lfts (1.5-)2-4 mm 251.
M. densa (p. 410).
29.
Longer lf-stks 9-13 cm and rachis of longer pinnae 4-5 cm; longest lfts ±7 mm 253.
M. pycnocoma (p. 412).
28.
Fls and bracts longer, the longest corollas 4.5-6 mm, the bracts (2.5-)4-7 mm, the capitula without filaments 10-15 mm diam.; sympatric in part with the last but also allopatric s.-ward in Goias and Distrito Federal.
30.
Rachis of longer pinnae 4-7 cm; peduncles 5-8 cm; local on upper rio Gama in Distrito Federal 250.
M. heringeri (p. 410).
30.
Rachis of longer pinnae 1.4-4(-4.3) cm; peduncles 2-5.5(-6) cm; n. and s. of Distrito Federal but not known within it.
31.
Young branchlets, lf-stks and axes ofinflorescence silky-tomentose with densefine,commonlyflexuousflagelliformsetae to 1.5-3 mm; Chapada dos Veadeiros 252.
M. laniceps (p. 412).
31.
Young branchlets, lf-stks and axes ofinflorescence pubescent with shorter coarser setae to 1-1.5 mm, strigose or silky; Sa. dos Cristais, s.-e. Goias.
249.
M. decorticans (p. 409).
24.
Diverse in stature and growth-habit, but epidermis of annotinous branches persistent.
32.
Petioles including pulvinus 4.5-33 cm; a spicule between each pair of pinnae; stems glabrous or almost so.
32.
Petioles less than 4 cm or, if slightly more, either stems densely pubescent, or interpinnal spicules 0, or both at once.
33.
Stems at anthesis and afterward leafless above very base or bearing no more than 1 expanded If distant no more than 1 dm from few large radical ones, the inflorescence erect wandlike efoliate.
34.
Setae of inflorescence fine, the stoutest of them less than 0.2 mm diam. at base, tapering into a soft silky-flageUiform tip.
35.
Rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-7 cm; peduncles mostly 0, rarely a few proximal ones to 1.5 cm; capitula prior to anthesis conelike, without filaments 11-14 mm diam., the bracts 4-6 mm; Sa.
Geral do Parana and Distrito Federal 240.
M. eriorrhachis (p. 396).
35.
Rachis of longer pinnae 5-11 cm; peduncles 1.5-2 cm; capitula prior to anthesis moriform, without filaments ±10 mm diam., the bracts 2-2.5 mm; s. Chapada dos Veadeiros. .. 241.
M. cryptothamnos (p. 397).
34.
Setae of inflorescence coarse, the stouter ones 0.2-0.4 mm diam. at dilated base, the indumentum hispid; vars. of: 242.
M. claussenii (p. 397).
33.
Stems at anthesis bearing at least 2, usually several or many already fully expanded or rapidly expanding lvs. [If brought hither by specimens in flower only, consider the possibility that the pod is a craspedium and see M. setosa, p. 000].
36.
Dispersal cisfranciscan, extending from Chapada Diamantina in s.-centr. Bahia s. through Sas. do Cabral and do Espinha90 to centr. Minas Gerais.
37.
Rachis of longer pinnae 1-4 cm and their lfts 12-34(-36)-jug.; vars. of: 227.
M. foliolosa (p. 373).
37.
Rachis of longer pinnae 4-8 cm and their lfts 37-63-jug.; local in n.-centr. Minas Gerais in lat. 16''30'-18°30'S.
38.
Stems erect from xylopodium ±5 dm tall; style 16-17 mm, exserted 1-2 mm beyond longer filaments; local near Francisco Sa (16°30'S); var. paucipinna of: 239.
M. albolanata (p. 395).
38.
Stems shmbby and attaining 2 m; style 24-28 mm, exserted 6-8 mm beyond longer filaments; near Diamantina (18°15'S) 244.
M. stylosa (p. 405).
36.
Dispersal transfranciscan, highly concentrated in centr. and s. Goias (with Distrito Federal), e. into n.-w. Minas Gerais, s. to the Triangulo Mineiro, w. to Mato Grosso.
39.
Diffuse subshrubs, the stems humistrately procumbent or weakly assurgent distally, hispid with vertically erect tawny setae to 2-4 mm; corolla ±3.5 mm 235.
M. prorepens (p. 389).
39.
Trees, shrubs and subshrubs, the latter erect-ascending and either not hispid, or largerfld, or both.
40.
Stipules and bracts of inflorescence very broad and conspicuous, the former 15-30 X 7-13 mm; trees of Chapada dos Veadeiros.
41.
Pachycaul, the annotinous branchlets 10-15 mm diam., comose with flagelliform setae to 5-10 mm; stipules early deciduous, of firm texture, obscurely venulose, densely setose extemally, glabrous castaneous within; peduncles 5-8 cm; capitula without filaments ±20 mm diam.; corolla 7-8 mm, the lobes concealed by a dense coat of setulae; fl. III-IV 256.
M. regina (p. 416).
41.
Stems not pachycaul, the annotinous branchlets not over 5 mm diam., viscidvillosulous but not setose; stipules persistent but early deflexed, papery, sharply multistriate, concolorous and finely villosulous on both faces; peduncles 2.5-4 cm; capitula without filaments ±12 mm diam.; corolla 4.5-6 mm, the lobes thinly viUosulous extemally; fl. IX-X 255.
M. rhodostegia (p. 414).
40.
Stipules and bracts less ample, the former 3.5-11(-16) x 0.5-5.5 mm.
42.
Rachis of longer pinnae 17-35 mm.
43.
Pachycaul rosette-trees of Chapada dos Veadeiros with homotinous lvs crowded on short axis at apex of defoliate branchlets.
44.
Stipules persistent as a thatch on the defoliate annotinous branchlets, their blade setose both within and without; pinnae (18-)20-30-jug. and longest lfts 2.5-3.5 x 0.8-1.2 mm 257.
M. manidea (p. 417).
44.
Stipules deciduous with or before associated If, their blade glabrous or almost so within; pinnae of longer lvs 8-15-jug. and longest lfts 4-6 x 1.5-2.2 mm 259.
M. oedoclada (p. 419).
43.
Slender shmbs, subshrubs and treelets with lvs dispersed along extended homotinous cauline axis.
45.
Peduncles 5-8 cm; trees 4 m; Chapada dos Veadeiros 245.
M. rheiptera (p. 405). ^ ^ ^ ^ ] BARNEBY: SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (M/Af05yi) 373 45.
Peduncles 1.5-3.5 cm; shrubs 0.4-2 m; allopatric; vars. of: 227.
M. foliolosa (p. 373).
42.
Rachis of longer pinnae 35 mm and longer.
46.
Longer pinnae of fully expanded lvs 7-15 cm and larger lfts at least 7 mm.
47.
Peduncles 3-13(-17) cm; highlands of Goias s.-ward from 13°S. and e. into Minas Gerais.
242.
M. claussenii (p. 397).
47.
Peduncles 1.5-2.5 cm; Sa. da Natividade near 12''S in Goias 243.
M. gardneri (p. 404).
46.
Longer pinnae of fully expanded lvs 3.5-7 cm or, if to 8 cm, the longer lfts not over 6 mm.
48.
Longer peduncles 8-17(-19) cm.
49.
Low procumbent or assurgent subshrubs forming thickets 1-3 m diam. but only ±5 dm tall; lf-stks randomly spiculate; pod 9-10.5 mm wide and ±4-5 times as long 247.
M. longepedunculata (p. 407).
49.
Variable in habit but mostly over 1 m tall; spicules 0; pods mostly 12-20 mm wide and 2-3 times as long; vars. of: 242.
M. claussenii (p. 397).
48.
Longer peduncles less than 7.5 cm.
50.
Stems and foliage densely softly gray-villous-viscidulous with fine gray hairs mixed with small gland-tipped setulae and slender rufous setae to 1-1.5 mm, but the villous element of the indumentum predominant, the foliage consequently subvelutinous; trees of Chapada dos Veadeiros 246.
M. struthionoptera (p. 406).
50.
Stems and foliage variably setose and villosulous, viscidulous or not so, but the setose element of the indumentum predominant; both symand allopatric.
51.
Peduncles or most of them at least 4.5 cm; Chapada dos Veadeiros and Sa.
Geral do Parana.
52.
Pinnae of larger lvs 21-28-jug. and lfts of longer pinnae 40-52-jug.; valves of pod setose with erect, distally incurved setae to 2-4 mm; vars. of: 242.
M. claussenii (p. 397).
52.
Pinnae of larger lvs 10-14-jug. and lfts of longer pinnae less than 40-jug.; valves of pod setose with subappressed-ascending setae to ±2 mm; var. rigens of: .. 227.
M. foliolosa (p. 373).
51.
Peduncles all less than 4.5 cm.
53.
Indumentum of plant composed of dense yellow setae 3-5 mm; very local in Distrito Federal 229.
M. auriberbis (p. 385).
53.
Indumentum of plant white, gray, or sordid; both symand allopatric.
54.
Plants forming conventional bushy or virgate shrubs with inflorescence-axis either foliate or exserted from foliage, but if exserted not longer, usually much shorter, than either the coetaneous leafy stems or the annotinous defoliate ones 227.
M. foliolosa (p. 373).
54.
Plants suffruticose, the stems arising anew yearly from xylopodium or short aerial woody rootstock and most lvs at early anthesis bome below midstem and on lower inflorescence-axis, this longer than coetaneous leafy stems or branches of caudex 239.
M. albolanata (p. 393).
227.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hookwith random (many) gland-tipped setulae, the er) 4: 406.
1842.—Typus infra sub var. folilfts either glabrous or villosulous on faces, thinly olosa (p. 373) indicatur. setulose-ciliolate or less often eciliolate.
Stipules firm, narrowly ovateor lance-acuminate 3- Erect unarmed, usually slender 5/zrwZ)5and5w^- 6.5(-9, exceptionally 12) x (0.5-)0.7-3.5 mm, shrubs (4-)6-15, less often 30(-50) dm tall, the invar. ng^«5 triangular-acuminate to 6 mm wide, homotinous stems usuaUy few-branched and each all glabrous within, subpersistent.
Leaf-stalks of branch passing upward into a pseudoraceme of major cauline lvs (4.5-)6-l 9(-21) cm, the petiole mostly small capitula exserted ±5-20 cm from including obese insensitive pulvinus 2-7 mm, foliage; the stems, lvs and inflorescence charged the longer interpinnal segments (2-)2.5-12 mm; with duplex vesture of fine short pallid villi and interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae of longer lvs either weak erect-incurved or coarser, widely as- (10-)12-39-jug., or in vars. foederalis and vercending to subappressed yellowish-rufescent senicosa only 7-15-jug., decrescent proximally and tae attaining (0.5-)l-6 mm in length and at base less or scarcely so distally, the rachis of longer 0.1-0.3, rarely 0.5-0.6 mm diam., these two priones (6-)9-45(-55) mm, the longer interfoliolar mary components of vesture independently varisegments 0.3-2 mm; lfts oflonger pinnae (12-) 16- able in length and density and often intermingled 44-jug., in outline narrowly oblong or oblongelliptic obtuse, the longest 1.5-6(-8) x 0.3-2.4 mm, either 2-3-nerved dorsally or venation scarcely perceptible.
Peduncles solitary and geminate (1-) 1.5-3, rarely 5-7 cm; capitula squatly ovoid-ellipsoid or subglobose, without filaments 7-13(-20) X 6-12(-14) mm, prior to anthesis either conelike or moriform, the receptacle usually less than 8 mm, rarely to 20 mm long; bracts narrowly spatulate-oblanceolate, those at and beyond mid-capitulum 2-6.5 x 0.4-1.1 mm, all dorsally setulose and setose-ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the proximal ones either staminate or degenerate; calyx including a fringe of ciUa 0.8-1.3(-1.6) mm, the subtruncate tube 0.25-0.45 mm, either glabrous or beyond middle extemally strigulose; corollas mostly 2.5-5.5, rarely 6-6.5 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.8- 1.2 mm, scarcely callous apically, dorsally pilosulous or strigose-setulose; filaments pink, shortly connate below ovary, exserted 6-10 mm.
Pods usually 1-3, rarely to 10 per capitulum, sessile or almost so, in profile oblong or oblongelUptic (15-)20-55 (in var. gravida to 85) mm long and (6-)7-14(-l 5, in var. corpulenta 16-18) mm wide, the replum 1.4-3.5(-4, in var. corpulenta 6-7) mm wide, produced at apex into an erect cusp 1 — 4 mm, the stiffly chartaceous or coriaceous valves densely or thinly villosulous and also coarsely, at times only remotely strigose or hispidulous with comma-shaped setae less than 1 mm, or rarely concealed by a fleece of finer, forwardly subappressed setae, rarely also viscidvillosulous, when ripe separating entire from replum except at very base, recurving from base to release the 7-12(-13) seeds.
The foregoing description records the limits of variation observed in the swarm of closely related microspecies that I here evaluate as varieties of a polymorphic M. foliolosa.
Their collective range extends over much of the Brazilian Planalto where they form a network of vicariant forms, each often sympatric with a variety of M albolanata, or of M. claussenii, or of both.
These three complexes are built up by accretion about three distinct general types, but I have found no one infallible criterion by which every member of each can be referred to its group.
Each criterion that is useful in one context fails in another, so that it could be argued that the three complexes run together in a continuous fabric of variation.
Field observation and experimental work is needed to determine whether or not this is the case, but to combine all three complexes under one specific heading would defeat the aims of classification, for it would assign to one megaspecies plants radically dissimilar in appearance, in detail, and in geographic dispersal.
Ideally, M. foliolosa sensu lato has a distinctly shrubby growth-form, relatively narrow stipules, an extended foliate stem-axis below the pseudoraceme yet raised (in mature individuals) on a framework of defoliate older branches, relatively short pinnae and small leaflets, and relatively small, shortly pedunculate capitula.
By contrast, M. albolanata sensu lato has a virgate growth-form with leaves at anthesis mostly crowded below mid-stem (but the inflorescence often hysteranthously foliate), the leaves themselves ampler, and the plumper capitula composed of longer flowers, but not different in length of peduncles.
Mimosa claussenii varies in habit between the growth-forms just described, but has broad stipules and either very ample leaves consisting of long pinnae and long leaflets, or large capitula bome on long peduncles, or some combination of these characters.
Departures from the idealized state of each character are frequent, as will be evident from the serial and infraspecific keys.
In assigning a particular plant to one of these three complexes I have been obliged to make arbitrary decisions which are obviously open to dispute or correction.
Key to subdivisions of M. foliolosa Rachis of longer pinnae not over 2.5 cm; 227/1. subsp. foliolosa: 2.
Pod 9-11 mm diam., its replum 1.4-2 mm wide; s.-e. Goias with Distrito Federal to w.-centr. and centr. Minas Gerais.
3.
Stems and dorsal face of If-axes pilose or strigose with narrowly ascending or forwardly subappressed setae; Distrito Federal and adj. Goias 227/Ia. var. pubescens (p. 375).
3.
Stems and dorsal face of If-axes pilose with vertically erect or widely incurved-ascending setae; sympatric with the last in Goias, e. into Minas Gerais.
4.
Longer setae of stems 2-3.3 mm; some gland-tipped setulae on lf-stks.
5.
Setae along back of If-axes relatively coarse, the longer ones 0.1-0.2 mm diam. at base; corollas at and above mid-capitulum 3.6-5 mm; calyx glabrous extemally, simply ciliolate; centr. and w.-centr. Minas Gerais 227/Ib. var. franciscana (p. 376).
5.
Setae along back of lf-stks fine and soft, less than 0.1 mm diam. at base; coroUas at and above mid-capitulum 2.5-3.5(-3.7) mm; calyx setulose extemally as well as ciliolate; local in range of var. pubescens 227/Ic. var. foliolosa (p. 377).
4.
Longer setae of stems 5-6 mm; no gland-tipped setulae; known only from the Almas fork of rio Tocantins in e.-centr. Goias 227/Id. var. brevipinna (p. 377).
2.
Pod 16-18 mm diam., its replum 6-7 mm wide; Triangulo Mineiro (near Uberaba) 227/Ie. var. corpulenta (p. 377).
Rachis of longer pinnae more than 2.5 cm.
6.
Capitula prior to anthesis conelike, the fl-buds concealed by bracts or by their fringe of setae; 227/ II. subsp. pachycarpa: 7.
Dispersed over s. Goias, Distrito Federal and s. Mato Grosso.
8.
Capitula without filaments 11-12 mm diam.; pod very large, 55-85 mm long and its replum 3.5-6 mm wide; s.-e. Mato Grosso and s.-w. Goias 227/IId. var. gravida (p. 379).
8.
Capitula without filaments 7-10 mm diam.; pod shorter and replum narrower; s.-centr. and s.-e. Goias with Distrito Federal.
9.
Lf-formula xx-xxxvii/22-44 and larger lfts 2-4 mm; Sa.
Dourada in s.-centr. Goias. ... 227/IIa. var. multipinna (p. 378).
9.
Lf-formula vi-xxii/16-27 and larger lfts 4-8 mm; relatively widespread in range given.
10.
Pinnae of longer lvs 16-22-jug.; Corumba valley in Goias 227/IIb. var. cercadoensis (p. 378).
10.
Pinnae of longer lvs 6-15-jug.; common in and near Distrito Federal 227/IIc. var. foederalis (p. 379).
7.
Dispersed along mountains e. of S. Francisco river from Chapada Diamantina in Bahia to Sa. do Espinhago in centr. Minas Gerais.
11.
Pod scabrously strigose with comma-shaped, forwardly appressed setae; Minas Gerais.
12.
Capitula 7-8 mm diam.; range on Sa. do Cipo and vicinity in lat. 19''30'-20°S 227/IIe. var. pachycarpa (p. 380).
12.
Capitula 8-10 mm diam.; range through 18° to 19°30'S.
13.
Lf-axes and lfts densely villosulous and viscid with mixedfinesetae, villi, and glandtipped setulae; larger lfts 4-6 mm; Diamantina to Gouveia 227/IIf var. viscidula (p. 380).
13.
Lf-axes thinly setose, scarcely or not glandular, and lfts glabrous; larger lfts 5-9(-l 0) mm; Sa. da Lapa and vicinity 227/IIg. var. vernicosa (p. 381).
11.
Pod comosely hispid with densely crowded, erect-ascending, tapering setae; Bahia 227/IIh. var. peregrina (p. 381).
6.
Capitula prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds surpassing the bracts; 227/III. subsp. brevibractea: 14.
Stipules lanceolate, at base 1.5-3.5 mm wide; setae of stems relatively slender, at base 0.1-0.2 mm diam. 15.
Capitula globose, the floral receptacle 4-8 mm long. 16.
Valves of pod scabrous with appressed, comma-shaped or flagellate setae to 0.6-1.6 mm; common in Distrito Federal and apparently disjunct on Sa. do Cabral in Minas Gerais 227/IIIa. var. brevibractea (p. 382).
16.
Valves of pod concealed by a dense fleece of incurved-ascending flagellate setae to 4- 5 mm; Sa.
Geral do Parana n. to Montealegre, Goias.
.
227/IIIb. var. paranani (p. 383).
15.
Capitula ellipsoid, the floral receptacle 12-20 mm; Sa. da Anta near Paracatu, w. Minas Gerais 227/IIIc. var. antana (p. 383).
14.
Stipules triangular-acuminate, at base 5-6 mm wide; setae of stems coarse, at base ±0.5-0.6 mm diam.; local on Chapada dos Veadeiros, e.-centr. Goias 227/IIId. var. rigens (p. 383).
227/1.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. foliolosa.
M. foliolosa Bentham, 1842, I.e., sens, ampliat.—Typus infra sub var. foliolosa indicatur.
Leaf-formula xvi-xxxix/(14-)20-28(-34), the rachis of longer pinnae (6-)9-24(-25) mm; peduncles 1-3 cm; capitula without filaments 8- 12(-13) mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike, the bracts mostly 2-3.5 mm; corolla 2.5-5.2 mm.
227/Ia. Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. foliolosa var. pubescens Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 406.
1842.-"BrazU, Pohl,'' the locality particularized under var. strigosa (v. sequ.): "ad Montes Claros provinciae Goyaz."
— Holotypus, Pohl 1204 = d.l400, K (herb.
Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1914; isotypi, K (herb.
Benth.)! NY! W\—M. foliolosa var. strigosa Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 388.
1876, nom. commutat. aptius sed superfl. MIMOSA FOLIOLOSA subsp. PACHYCARPA var. FOEDERALIS OTHER VARS. labelled.
MAP 31.
Planaltine Brazil.
Range of M. foliolosa Bentham subsp. foliolosa (except var. corpulenta Bameby).
MAP 32.
Planaltine Brazil.
Range of M. foliolosa Bentham subsp. pachycarpa (Bentham) Bameby (except var. cercadoensis Bameby).
MAP 33.
Planaltine Brazil.
Range of M. foliolosa Bentham subsp. brevibractea Bameby.
Stems and lf-stks strigose-pilose with narrowly ascending or forwardly subappressed setae to 1- 2 mm mixed with fine puberulence and often with scattered gland-tipped setulae; lf-stks 6-16 cm; pinnae of larger lvs 20-37-jug., the rachis of longer ones 10-22(-25) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 17-28-jug., the blades to 1.5-3 x 0.3-1 mm; corolla 2.5-3.7 mm; pod ±30-45 x 6-8 mm, strigose with comma-shaped setulae less than 1 mm.
In cerrado, commonly on red sandy soils, 850- 1100 m, locally common in Distrito Federal and in Goias immediately adjacent on the n., w. and s., in lat. 14-17°S.-n. IX-III. Map 31.
The var. pubescens has tumed out to be far commoner and more representative of its species than var. foliolosa.
It is closely related to var. multipinna, but differs, usuaUy decisively, in more numerous and shorter pinnae and in smaUer, more crowded leaflets.
227/Ib.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. foliolosa var. franciscana Bameby, var. nov., caulium necnon foliorum axibus setoso-comosis war.foliolosaeproidma, ab ilia setis fortioribus basi 0.1-0.2 mm usque crassis, coroUis bisexualibus longioribus 3.6-5 (nec 2.5-3.7) mm longis, calycisque tubo extus glabro diversa.— Brazil.
Minas Gerais: rocky cerrado slopes near Gouveia, ±33 km s.-w. of Diamantina, 19.1.1969 (fl, fr annot.), Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 22257.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, MBM, NY, P, R, S, US. (?) M. platyloma Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 406.
1842.-"BrazU, Se//o." Holotypus, Sello 1385, +B = F Neg. 1385. —No duplicate found, and identity consequently uncertain, but the phototypus is suggestive of var. franciscana, which could have been encountered by Sello in or near the present municipio of Gouveia, Minas Gerais.
Stems and lf-stks comose with widely spreading, often incurved golden setae to 1.5-2.5 mm; lf-stks (4.5-)6-10.5 cm; pinnae of larger lvs 16- 30-jug., the rachis of longer ones 10-22 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 16-28(-34)-jug., the blades to 1.5-3 X 0.4-0.8 mm; corollas 3.5-5 mm; pod (15-)20-45 X (6-)7-12 mm, strigose.
In cerrado, commonly on rocky soils, 650- 1250 m, local on both slopes of the S. Francisco valley in centr. and w.-centr. Minas Gerais (Paracatu; Sa. do Cabral; Gouveia).—Fl.
II-IV. Map 31.
The var. franciscana was known to Bentham in the form of Riedel 2523 collected in September 1834 at Paracatu, specimens in fruit that were doubtfully referred in Flora brasiliensis (p. 388) to M. gardneri.
Flowering material obtained by Irwin at the same place (no. 26033, NY) and closely similar plants from Sa. do Cabral and Sa. do Espinhafo near Gouveia have the leaf-formula of M. foliolosa sensu lato, but are distinguished by dense golden-setose pubescence, extemaUy glabrous calyx, and sUghtly longer flower.
227/Ic.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. foliolosa var. foliolosa.
M. foliolosa Bentham, 1842, I.e., sens, str.—"Brazil, Pohl."
\ more particularly "ad Santa Luzia versus Ponte Alto [a fork of rio Corumba in s.-e. Goias]."—Holotypus, Pohl 1203 = d.l407, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1913; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54835, M! NY! W! Finely gray-villosulous and setose with slender erect setae to 2-3.3 mm mixed with shorter glandtipped ones; leaf-formula xvii-xxx/16-25, the lfstks 7-13 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 10-22 mm, the longer lfts 1.5-2.5 x 0.5-0.7 mm; corollas 2.5-3.7 mm; pod unknown.
In cerrado near 900 m, known only from valleys of rios Ponte Alta, Descoberto and S. Marcos (lat. 16°-17°30'S) in s.-e. Goias.-Fl.
I-III. Map 31.
The var. foliolosa differs from the common var. pubescens only in the soft spreading setose element of the pubescence, but this is visually striking.
A sterile specimen (Burchell 7587.
K) from near the present Tupira9aba in central Goias near 14°30'S suggests a considerable range-extension northward, but its foliage is atypically glandular.
227/Id. Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. foliolosa var. brevipinna (Bentham) Bameby, comb. nov. M. gardneri var. brevipinna Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 388.
1876.— "Habitat in collibus siccis provinciae Goyaz: Gardner n. 3134.
.
. ."—Holotypus, collected at Almas, near ir30'S, 47°10'W in n.-centr. Goias, K(hb. Hook.)! = NYNegs.
1911,11659.
Stems and lf-stks barbate with fine erect rufescent setae to 5-6 mm, nowhere glandular; leafformula xxiv-xxvi/25-28, the lf-stks 8-10 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 7-20 cm, the longer lfts 2.5-3 X 0.5-0.6 mm; corolla 2.5-3.3 mm; pod unknown.
Reported from dry hillsides, very likely in cerrado, known only from the type-locality on the w. slope of Sa.
Geral de Goias at 11°30'S in Goias, BraziL-Fl.
X-?Map31.
The var. brevipinna seems to differ from other varieties of suhsp. foliolosa only in the extremely long rusty bristles clothing the stems and leafstalks, the leaf-formula and components of the small capitula offering nothing out of the ordinary.
I see no close kinship to M. gardneri, a species of which Bentham had only a vague concept.
227/Ie.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. foliolosa var. corpulenta Bameby, var. nov., ab aliis subspeciei suae varietatibus leguminis maxime obesi 30-40 x 16-18 mm replo latissimo 6-7 mm lato eximie diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Lenhoso to rio Tijuco [n.-w. of Uberaba, t. Smith & Smith, 1967: 499], 12.
IX.1827 (fr), W. J. Burchell 5756.-Holotypus, K! = NY Neg. 7977.
Stature not determinable from specimens, but perhaps a depressed suffrutex, the stems, lf-stks and peduncles pUose with ascending rufous setae ±1-1.5 mm mixed with villi and scattered glandtipped setulae, the lfts facially glabrous ciliolate; leaf-formula xx-xlii/20-23, the longer lf-stks 8- 14 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 12-20 mm, the larger lfts 2-2.8 x 0.6-0.8 mm; capitula and ffs unknown; pod extremely massive ± 3 0 ^ 0 x 16-18 mm, the long-beaked replum 6-7 mm wide, this and the valves thinly villosulous and scabrous with scattered, narrowly ascending broad-based setulae less than 1 mm.
In unrecorded habitat, to be expected in cerrado, known only from the type-locality near the source of rio Tijuco at ±19°30'S, 48°W in the Triangulo of w. Minas Gerais.—Fr.
X-XI, fl. ? The type-collection of var. corpulenta contributed to the description ofM. densa in Flora brasiliensis, but is very different from the distantly allopatric shrub with decorticate annotinous branchlets to which the epithet densa was originally applied.
I refer var. corpulenta to M. foliolosa subsp. foliolosa because of its proportionately long leaf-rachis and short but numerous pinnae bearing about twenty pairs of leaffets less than 3 mm long. These leaves, however, are combined with an extremely massive pod not encountered elsewhere in subsp. foliolosa.
The pod of subsp. pachycarpa var. gravida approaches that of var. corpulenta in girth and width of replum, but is about twice as long and coupled with much longer pinnae and larger leaffets.
The only other mimosa of the pachycarpous type known to occur south of rio Paranaiba in western Minas Gerais is M. lithoreas, near Patrocinio, obviously different in humifuse infforescence and long pedimcles.
227/11.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. pachycarpa (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. pachycarpa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 406.
1842, sens, ampliat.—Typus infra sub var. pachycarpa (p. 380) indicatur.
Leaf-formula (vii-)xii-xxxvii/( 12-) 15-44, the rachis of longer pinnae 2.5-5.5 cm; peduncles (1-)1.5-3.5(-4.5) cm; capitula without filaments 7-14 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike, the ff-buds surpassed or covered by bracts or at least by their cilia, the bracts themselves (2.5-)3-5.5 mm; corolla 2.5-5(-6) mm.
227/IIa.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. pachycarpa (Bentham) var. multipinna (Bentham) Bameby, comb, nov., based on autonym generated by M. multipinna var. microphylla Bentham, q.v. infra. M. multipinna Bentham, Proc. Linn. Soc. London 30: 440.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 388.
1876.- "Habitat in provincia Minas Geraes: Claussen; in provincia Goyaz inter Paranayba et Goyaz: BurcheU n. 6170,6700-14; ad Cercado: Pohl."
-Lectotypus, Burchell 6700-14, collected 17.11.1828 between Goias Velho and Aldeia de S. Jose, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 11652A.—The syntypi represent other taxa: Claussen s.n.,
K (hb. Benth.)! = M. foliolosa var. pachycarpa; Burchell 6170, in bud only, from between Bomfim and rio Paracanjuba [near present Anapolis], K! = M. foliolosa var. foederalis; and Pohl 1205 = d.l365 from [Fazenda] Cercado [between rio Areias and Commba de Goias], F! K! NY! W! = M. foliolosa var. cercadoensis.
M. multipinna var. microphylla Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 388.
1876.-"ad Montes Claros provinciae Goyaz: Pohl."
—Holotypus, Pohl 1204 = d.l400, ex parte, W (2 sheets)!—The specimens may be mislabelled, as others distributed under no. 1204/ 1400 = M. foliolosa var. pubescens, and the plant in question has been collected subsequently only on Sa.
Dourada.
Attaining 6-15 dm; young stems and lf-stks pilose with narrowly ascending slender setae to 1.5-3.3 mm mixed with random shorter glandtipped ones; leaf-formula xx-xxxvii/22-44, the rachis of longer pinnae (15-)25-40 mm, the longer lfts (2-)2.4-4 X 0.6-1.2 mm; capitula without filaments 10-14 mm diam.; corolla 4-5.2 mm; pods 30-60 X 12-15 mm, the replum 2-3.5 mm wide, the valves thinly coarsely strigulose with comma-shaped setulae.
In cerrado, on sandy or stony soils associated with quartzite outcrops, 800-1050 m, locaUy plentiful on Sa.
Dourada in s.-centr. Goias.—Fl.
XII-II. Map 32.
The var. multipinna has the very small crowded leaffets of subsp. foliolosa but these are bome on longer pinnae and accompanied by plumper capitula of slightly longer ffowers.
The original M. multipinna, as analyzed in the foregoing paragraph of synonymy, was a mixture of four taxa.
227/IIb.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. pachycarpa (Bentham) var. cercadoensis Barneby, var. nov., a war. foederali statura robustiori pinnisque 16-22 (nec 6-15)-jugis abstans.—Brazil.
Goias: Fazenda Cercado e. of Commba de Goias, 1.1819 (ff), /.
E. Pohl 1205 = ^.7i65.-Holotypus, K = NY Negs.
7972, 11652; isotypi, F = F Neg. 54847.
NY, W (2 sheets).
M. multipinna Bentham, 1876: 388, ex parte, quoad pi. pohl.,
caet. exclus.
Perhaps 1 m tall or more, coarsely pilose with narrowly ascending yellowish setae to 2-4 mm long and ±0.2-0.3 mm diam. at base, eglandular; leaf-formula xvi-xx/22-27, the rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-4.5 cm, the longer lfts 4.5-6 x 1.3-1.8 mm, all distinctly 3-nerved dorsally; infforescence of var. foederalis; pod unknown.
Presumably in cerrado near 800-900 m, known only from upper rio Corumba near 16°S in s.- centr. Goias.—Fl.
I-II. This troublesome plant formed part of M. multipinna Benth.,
herein typified in the sense of the closely related mimosa endemic to Sa.
Dourada that differs in more numerous, more crowded and smaller, veinless leaflets and in larger capitula.
In leaflets and capitula var. cercadoensis is essentially like sympatric war. foederalis, of which it perhaps represents an exceptionally vigorous, multipinnate population. mary lvs vii-xiv/(14-)16-26(-27), the pinnae of some upper lvs fewer, the rachis of longer pinnae 3-5.5 cm, the longer lfts (3.5-)4-8 x 1-2.4 mm, all 2(-3)-nerved dorsally; capitula (7-)8-10 mm diam.; corolla 3-4.2 mm; pods 35-55 x (9-)10- 13 mm, the replum 1.5-2.5 mm wide, the valves scaberulous with appressed comma-shaped setulae less than 1 mm.
In cerrado and campo sujo subject to fire, 950- 1250 m, locally plentiful on the sources of rio Corumba in Distrito Federal and Goias closely adjacent to the w., locally n. across the Tocantins watershed to the head of rio Parana.—Fl.
IXIII; fr.
Xll-onward, long persistent on annotinous stems.
Map 32.
While a small sample of var. foederalis collected by Burchell in 1828 near Anapolis contributed to the protologue of M. multipinna Benth.,
and the variety was also encountered by Glaziou in 1895, it has never acquired a name of its own.
Its range very nearly coincides with that of svibsp.foliolosa var. pubescens, with which it is sometimes associated, but it is readily distinguished by fewer longer pinnae and longer, dorsally nerved, facially glabrous leaflets.
227/IIc.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. pachycarpa (Bentham) var. foederalis Bameby, var. nov., a formis arete affinibus sic notabilis: pubes strigoso-scabra appressa vel subappressa vix glandulosa; pinnae paucae, foliorum majorum saepissime 6-15-, summorum 3-6-jugae, longiomm rachi 3-5.5 cm longa; foliola (15-) 16-27-juga usque, iis subsp. foliolosae majora, ±4-8 x 1-2.4 mm, dorso 1-2-nervia; capitula ante anthesin conoidea, dein absque filamentis (7-)8-10 mm diam.; ab affini var. cercadoensi certe proximo praesertim pinnamm numero forsan arte separata. — Brazil.
Distrito Federal: Brazlandia, Brasilia, 2.
XI.1976 (fl), E. P. Heringer 16178.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, BRADE, NY.
M. multipinna Bentham, 1876: 388, ex parte (Burchell 6170, caet. exclus.); sensu Glaziou, 1906: 183.
Stems in the first instance from small knotty xylopodium but if not fire-pruned frutescent, awkwardly few-branched, attaining 7-20(-30) dm, coarsely strigose with forwardly appressed or narrowly ascending, tapering setae to 1-3.5 mm, eglandular or almost so; lf-formula of pri- 227/IId.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. pachycarpa (Bentham) var, gravida Bameby, var. nov., inter aflines legumine maximo crasso 5.5-8.5 cm longo, replo latissimo 3.5-6 (nec 2-3.5) mm lato praestans, a vicina var. multipinna ulterius pinnis minus numerosis 13- 23 (nec 20-37)-jugis usque diversa.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso: Vale de Sonhos, 80 km n. of Barra do Garc^s, 28.
VIII. 1972 (fr), /.
A. Ratter (with S. G. da Fonseca & R. A. de Castro) 229^.-Holotypus, NY; isotypi, K, UB, UC.
Shrubs 12-20 dm, with eventually defoliate trunks, the young stems and lf-stks viscid-villosulous and pilose with ascending yellowish setae ±1-3 mm, minute villi, and gland-tipped setulae variable in density, the lustrous lfts either glabrous on both faces or puberulent dorsally; leaf-formula xii-xxiii(-xxviii)/23-44, the lf-stks of longer lvs 6-15.5 cm, the rachis of longer p/«- nae (2.5-)3-5 cm, the longer lfts 3.7-5.5 x 0.8- 1.3 mm; capitula without filaments 11-12 mm diam.; corolla 4-5 mm; pods 55-85 x 13-15 mm, the replum (3.5-)4-6 mm wide, produced into a cusp 4-10 mm, the valves viscid-viUosulous and scabrous with scattered, mostly comma-shaped, forwardly subappressed setulae to 0.6-1 mm.
On sandy or stony flats and hillsides in cerrado or margin of cerradao, 450-700 m, local on the upper rios Araguaia and das Mortes between 15°30' and 16°30'S in s.-e. Mato Grosso and s.- w. Goias (Sa. do Caiapo).-R. V-VI; fr.
VI onward, long persistent on defoUate stems. —Calumbi.
Map 32.
The var. gravida is notable for its massive pod with exceptionally wide replum and valves about 0.5-0.8 mm thick, of which all but 0.1 mm consists of Uvid exocarp.
In foliage it closely resembles distantly allopatric var. pachycarpa, which has pods less than half as long and in addition smaller capitula and individual flowers.
From var. multipinna, not far distant on Sa.
Dourada, it differs in substantially fewer pinnae.
227/IIe.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. pachycarpa (Bentham) Bameby var. pachycarpa.
M. pachycarpa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 406.
1842, sens. str.-"BrazU, Sello.''-Holotypus, Sello s.n. from "Vallo Fundo," apparently (t. Urban, 1906: 107) near Sa.
S. Antonio [Sa. do Cipo] in centr. Minas Gerais, +B = F Neg. 1391; no isotypus known to survive.
M. pachycarpa sensu Bentham, 1876: 390.
Attaining 4-7(-?) dm, the stems and lf-axes pilose with narrowly ascending setae to 1-2.5 mm mixed with rare gland-tipped setulae, the lfts facially glabrous; leaf-formula (x-)xii-xxiv/ 20-26, the rachis of longer pinnae (21-)25-35 mm, the longer lfts (2.7-)3-4.5 x 0.8-1.3 mm, all dorsally faintly 2-nerved or nerveless; capitula without filaments 7-8 mm diam.; corolla 3-4 mm; pods 20-40 x 11-12 mm, the replum ±4 mm wide, the exocarp of valves ± 1 mm thick, the valves and replum alike scabrous with sparse ascending tapering setae to 1-1.5 mm, these deciduous from weathered pod.
In sandy campo rupestre and on ledges of sandstone outcrops, 1100-1300 m, known only from the heights of Sa. do Espinha^o in lat. 19°30'-20°S (Sa. do Cipo; Sahara), centr. Minas Gerais.—Fl.
I-III. Map 32.
The var. pachycarpa is similar overall to distantly allopatric var. pubescens and \ar. foederalis, standing between them in number and length of pinnae but nearer to the latter in size of leaflets and in distance between successive pairs.
I employ the epithet pachycarpa in this connection with some uneasiness.
The type survives only in photograph, the type-locality is not certainly known, and the unicate specimen from which Bentham described the species consisted of an over-mature fmiting branchlet from which the lower leaves, probably more ample and complex than those that remain, have fallen.
Bentham recorded no exact locality for M. pachycarpa, but the words Vallo fundo written in ink next to Sello's printed label (F Neg. 7597!) may plausibly be equated with the place of that name in Sa. do Espinhafo of central Minas Gerais, where Sello, according to the itinerary given by Urban (1906), was coUecting in late October 1818.
227/IIf.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. pachycarpa (Bentham) Bameby var. viscidula Bameby, var. nov., a var. pachycarpa etiam in montibus Sa. do Espinha^o endemica indumento eximie viscido, capituUs majoribus (absque filamentis 10-14, nec 7-8 mm diam.) flosculisque ±4.5-6 (nec 3-4) mm longis diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Mun.
Inimutaba, above BR-259 near Corrego Garrote, 650 m, 23.11.1975 (fl + fr annot), W. R. Anderson (with Hatschbach, Barneby & Gates) 1528.— Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, NY, US. M. adenotricha sensu Glaziou, 1906: 183, ex parte (19128); non Benth.
Stems erect or incurved-ascending 5-15 dm, distally like lf-axes and lfts at once setulose and viscid-villosulous with tapering or filiform plain setae to 1-1.5 mm, shorter villi, and gland-tipped setulae, the lfts minutely puberulent facially; leafformula (x-)xii-xx/18-26, the lf-stks of longer lvs 6-14 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 25-35 mm, the longer lfts 4-6 x 1-1.6 mm, aU obtusely 1 -nerved beneath; capitula without filaments 10- 14 mm diam.; corolla (4.4-)4.8-6 mm; pods 40- 55 X 9-11 mm, the replum 3-4.5 mm wide produced into a cusp 3-5 mm, the valves ±0.7-1 mm thick, overall minutely villosulous and scabrous with sparse comma-shaped setulae less than 1 mm.
In campo mpestre and on rocky slopes in cerrado, 650-1300 m, locally plentiful on crest and w. slope of Sa. do Espinha90 between 18° and 19°S in centr. Minas Gerais (Diamantina and vicinity; Gouveia; Inimutaba).—Fl.
I-III, the pods long persisting on defoliate branches.
Map 32.
The var. viscidula closely resembles var. pachycarpa, vicariant southward along the Serra at similar elevations, but diflers in pronounced viscid indumentum of stems and foUage, in larger capitula, and in bisexual flowers about 4.5-6 (not 3-4) mm long. One coUection from 30 km s.-w. of Gouveia (W. R. Anderson 8642, NY) has only mdiments of gland-tipped setulae and appears in this respect transitional to var. pachycarpa.
Mimosa adenotricha, native in the same habitats and latitudes as var. pachycarpa, is similar in gross aspect, but differs in antrorsely prickly stems and in densely shortly hispidulous pod.
The fmit (Maguire 44788, NY) is illustrated by Morim de Lima (1985, photo 10).
227/IIg.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. pachycarpa (Bentham) Bameby var. vernicosa (Bentham) Bameby, comb, nov., based on autonym generated by M. vernicosa var. ciliata Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras 15(2): 386.
1876.
M. vernicosa Bongard ex Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 404.
1842.-"Serra da Lapa, [Minas Gerais, Riedel misit] Langsdorff.''—Holotypus, Riedel 12, collected X. 1824 (fl), K (herb.
Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1906; isotypi, numbered Riedel 1093, A! LE! = NY Neg. 11673, NY! US! M. vernicosa sensu Bentham, 1875: 439, 1876: 386, exclus. var. et loc. amazon.
Shrubs 3-5(-?) dm, the stems and lf-stks thinly strigulose with appressed setae to 0.6-1.5 mm and minutely randomly glandular, the lfts glabrous, nigrescent when dry; leaf-formula viixviii/12-18, the primary lf-stks 5-14 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 2-3.5 cm, the longer lfts 5- 9(-l 0) X 1.2-2.8 mm; capitula without filaments 10-12 mm diam.; corolla 5-7.5 mm; pod ±35 X 9 mm, the replum ±3 mm wide, the valves strigulose with scattered comma-shaped setulae.
Reported from wet stony places; to be sought in campo rupestre or brejo at elevations near and above 1000 m in centr. Sa. do Espinha90, known only from Sa. da Lapa and s.-w. of Diamantina in centr. Minas Gerais.-Fl. (?-)I-II. Map 32.
Bentham described M. vernicosa from a fragmentary specimen sent from St. Petersburg by Langsdorff; which shows only simplified upper leaves with some 4-6 pairs of pinnae.
He associated it with M. nitens, which has similar leafformula, but Riedel's full collection, numbered 1093 at LE and so distributed subsequently to herbaria in United States, bears ample cauline leaves, flowers in excellent condition and ripe fmits, demonstrating a much closer aflinity to M. foliolosa subsp. pachycarpa.
From var. pachycarpa, which replaces it immediately south of Sa. da Lapa on Sa. do Cipo and vicinity, var. vernicosa diflers in thicker capitula and larger glabrous leaflets that often turn livid-black when dry.
The capitula are almost those of var. viscidula, vicariant immediately northward along the crest of Sa. do Espinhago, but var. vernicosa is only remotely and obscurely stipitate-glandular.
These three varieties are interpreted as links in a replacement series within the widespread subsp. pachycarpa.
In Flora brasiliensis Bentham cited M. vernicosa not only from Minas Gerais but also from Borba on the lower Madeira river, said to be in the state of Para though actually in Amazonas.
This record is based on Riedel 629 (LE!,
mounted with Riedel 12), which appears to me to be most probably part of the type-collection from Sa. da Lapa, accidentally mislabelled and renumbered although still directly associated with the typeset.
The occurrence of any mimosa of this type in the Hylaean forest is wholly implausible.
227/IIh.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. pachycarpa (Bentham) Bameby var. peregrina Bameby.
M. foliolosa var. peregrina Bameby, Brittonia 37: 145.
1985.-"BrazU.
Bahia: 9- 10 km N of Rio de Contas, 20 Jul 1979 (fr jun), S. A. Mori (with King, dos Santos & Hage) 72555."-Holotypus, CEPEC 17566\; isotypi, NY! US! Attaining 1-1.5 m, the homotinous stems, Ifand inflorescence-axes hispid with erect-incurved plain setae to (1.5-)2-3.5 mm and at base not over 0.2 mm diam., sometimes mixed with rare shorter gland-tipped setulae; leaf-formula xUxxiii/25-36, the lf-stks 4.5-14 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 25-37(-50) mm, the longer lfts 3.5- 6 X 0.7-1.1 mm; capitula without filavnents 10- 13 mm diam.; corolla ±5 mm; pods 25-33 x 11-14 mm, the replum 1.5-2 mm wide, the valves hispid overaU with contiguous erect, distally attenuate-incurved setae, those of valves to 1.5-2 mm, those of replum scarcely shorter.
In campo mpestre, 980-1300 m, known only from e. slope of Chapada Diamantina in lat. 13°32'-36'S in s.-centr. Bahia, BrazU.-R. I-III. Map 32.
The isolated populations that I refer to var. peregrina seem to represent an offshoot of the M. foliolosa complex, even though detached branches that do not reveal the woody framework of former seasons closely mimic M. albolanata var. brasiliana.
Within M. foliolosa the variety is subordinated to subsp. pachycarpa because the floral bracts and their setae are until just before anthesis forwardly imbricated over the flowerbuds.
Within the subspecies it is handily distinguished by densely uniformly yellowishhispid, not scabrous-strigose pods.
The var. viscida, found in similar environment on Sa. do Espinha90 in Minas Gerais, differs further in slightly wider leaffets and in abundantly viscidsetulose foliage.
Without flowers var. peregrina resembles transfranciscan varieties of subsp. brevibractea, but the pod of each is perceptibly different: that of var. brevibractea appressed-scabrous; that of var. paranani scabrous-hispid on the broader replum but bearing a silky fleece of long-attenuate setae on the valves.
The known collections of var. peregrina differ somewhat in pubescence, even though all come from within 18 km radius of Rio das Contas.
The fruiting type and Harley 19784 (NY) in ffower, from the lower slopes of Pico de Almas, have stems and infforescence shaggy with tapering setae to 2-3.5 mm long; in Harley 20138 (NY) from south of Rio das Contas the setae do not exceed 1.5 mm in length.
227/III. Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. brevibractea Bameby, subsp. nov., a subsp. pachycarpa caeterius simili bracteis floralibus abbreviatis capitulisque ergo ante anthesin moriformibus absimilis. —Typus sub var. brevibractea indicatur.
Habit, stature and lf-formula essentially those of subsp. pachycarpa, but floral bracts no longer than fl-buds prior to anthesis and the capitula then moriform (not conelike).
The collective range of the varieties assembled under subsp. brevibractea extends from the S. Bartolomeu basin in Distrito Federal north through Sa.
Geral do Parana in Goias and east intermptedly to Sas. de Anta and do Cabral in Minas Gerais.
Within this range they are mutually vicariant, but in the Distrito, and in Minas Gerais, they are sympatric with members of subspp. foliolosa and pachycarpa.
227/IIIa.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. brevibractea Bameby var. brevibractea Barneby, subsp. et var. nov., a var. paranani leguminis replo valvulisque setis arete appressis 0.6-1.6 mm longis scabro-strigosis (nec densissime pellitis) diversa, a var. rigenti stipulis angustioribus basi 1.5-3.5 (nec 5-6) mm latis abstans.—Brazil.
Distrito Federal: n. of Barragem Paranoa, 27.11.1970 (fl), Irwin (with Fonseca, Souza, Reis dos Santos, Ramos) 26700.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, BR, K, LE, MO, NY, R, S, US. M. brevibractea Harms ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 185.
1906, nom. nud.-"Entre Paranaua et Retiro du Rio Torto, Goyaz."
—Specimina authent.: Glaziou 21096, +B = F Neg. 1400! G! K! P (2 sheets)! Stems attaining (1-) 1.5-3 m, together with lfaxes and inflorescence strigose with forwardly subappressed, tapering or shortly flagelliform setae ±1-2 mm long and at base not over 0.2 mm diam., eglandular, the lfts facially glabrous; leafformula xiii-xxiv/28-45, the longer lf-stks 9- 21 (-24) cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 3.5- 5(-6.5) cm, the larger lfts (3.7-)4-6(-6.5) x 0.8- 1.2 mm; capitula globose or plumply ellipsoid, without filaments 10-13 mm diam.; bracts 2.5- 3.7(-4.5) mm; bisexual corollas 4-5.1 mm; pods 30-55 X 10-12 mm, the replum 2-3.5 mm wide, together with livid-brown valves densely strigose with coarse appressed brownish, abruptly tapering or flagelliform setae to 0.6-1.6 mm.
In cerrado, 800-1075 m, locally plentiful in basin of rio S. Bartolomeu in Distrito Federal, Brazil, and disjunct in w. and w.-centr. Minas Gerais on Sas. da Anta near Paracatu and do Cabral near Cantoni. - H .
I-V(-VIII); fr. (III-)IVIX, persisting after dehiscence and fall of seeds.
Map 33.
In the Federal District var. brevibractea is sympatric with subsp. foliolosa var. pubescens and with subsp. pachycarpa var. foederalis, but differs from both in moriform capitula, from the first in much longer pinnae and larger leaflets, and from the second in more numerous and consequently more crowded leaflets.
The closely related var. paranani, next following, is vicariant northward, outside the District, and differs substantially only in vesture of the somewhat broader pods.
The var. brevibractea was collected first by Glaziou in 1895 and recognized, but not described by Harms as a new species.
I here adopt Harms's epithet, but in the subspecific and varietal categories assume authorship of it.
227/IIIb.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. brevibractea Bameby var. paranani Bameby, var. nov., a var. brevibractea vix nisi legumine vellere e setis sericeis ffagelliformibus constituto densissime induto, reploque suo latissimo fere 5 (nec 2-3.5) mm lato absimilis.—Brazil.
Goias: Rio Parana, ±35 km n. of Formosa toward S. Gabriel, 29.
III. 1966 (ff, frjun), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 14225. — Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, M, P, R, S, US. [M. multipinnoides Harms ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 185 (sphalm. multispinoides), 657.
1906, nom. nud.—"Lagoa Formosa, pres de I'eau."
—Specimina authent.: +B = F Neg. 1421\ K! P!] M. adenotricha sensu Glaziou (1906: 183), ex parte (no. 21102).
Habit, stature and pubescence of var. brevibractea except for looser canescent silky-pilose indumentum of infforescence; leaf-formula xiiixxiv/27-40, the longer lf-stks 7-14 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 2.5-4 cm, the larger lfts 3.5-5.5 X 0.6-0.85 mm; capitula without filaments 9- 11 mm diam.; bracts 2.5-4 (-4.5) mm; bisexual corollas 4.8-6.5 mm; pods plumply eUipsoid ±25 X 14 mm, the replum nearly 5 mm wide, muticous at apex, scabrous with coarse, forwardly appressed setae, the valves concealed by a ffeece of silky ffagelliform setae to 4-5 mm.
In cerrado, 850-1100 m, locally plentiful along upper rios Parana and Maranhao in lat. 14°30'- 15°40'S and apparently disjunct near Montealegre at lat. 13°20'S in e.-centr. Goias.
The var. paranani is closely related to var. brevibractea and like it was first collected by Glaziou and named in manuscript by Harms.
It differs from var. brevibractea, which has essentially the same foliage and capitula, in longer looser silky-ffagelliform setae of the peduncles and especially in the pod of broad outline, shaggy on the valves with long silky setae and girdled with an exceptionally broad, more shortly scabroussetose replum.
As Harms's epithet multipinnoides suggests, the overall habit of var. paranani recalls subsp. foliolosa var. multipinna of Sa.
Dourada.
This differs in leaf-formula (pinnae more and leaffets less numerous in comparable leaves), in conelike capitula, and in scabrous pods two to three times as long. 227/IIIc.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. brevibractea Bameby var. antana Bameby, var. nov., var. brevibracteae proxima et haud nisi capituUs ellipsoideis, receptaculo 12-20 (nec 4-8) mm longo diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Sa. da Anta ±7 km w. of Paracatu, 4.
II.1970 (ff), Irwin (with Onishi, Fonseca, Souza, Reis dos Santos & Ramos) 26034.— Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, R, US. In all respects like var. brevibractea except for ellipsoid capitula with receptacle over 1 cm long; leaf-formula ±xxii-xxiv/36; pod unknown.
In campo with scattered shmbs and low trees, 850 m, known only from Sa. da Anta w. of Paracatu at ±16°30'S, in w. Minas Gerais, Brazil.— ¥11-II(-?).
Map 33.
227/IIId.
Mimosa foliolosa Bentham subsp. brevibractea Bameby var. rigens Bameby, var. nov., imprimis pube e setis validis basi bulbosis 0.5-0.6 mm diam. usque constanti stipulisque magnis triangulari-acuminatis 9-12 X 5-6 mm omnibus ab aliis M. foliolosae formis diversa, stipularum forma M. claussenii revocans sed leguminis forma potius M. foliolosae consanguinea.—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros ±20 km s. of Alto Paraiso, 20.
III. 1969 (ff, fr), Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 2^6^7.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Shrubs ± I m, the stems, lf-stks and axes of infforescence densely hispid with yellowish ascending setae of different sizes, the largest 2—4 mm long and at dilated base 0.5-0.6 mm diam.; stipules triangular-acuminate 9-12 x 5-6 mm; leaf-formula x-xiv/31-38, the longer lf-stks 9- 14 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 4-5.5 cm, the longer lfts 5-6.5 x 1.1-1.5 mm; peduncles (4-)5- 7 cm; capitula without filaments 15-20 x 11- 13 mm; bisexual corollas 4.5-5.3 mm; pods oblong-elUptic, in profile 30-35 x 11-12 mm, the replum to ±2 mm wide produced at apex into a triangular point not over 1 mm, the valves and replum alike concealed by a dense coat of contiguous subappressed-ascending setae, the coarser ones of the valves to ±2 mm, those of replum a little shorter.
In campo rupestre near 1000 m, known only from the s. end of Chapada dos Veadeiros, near 14°20'S in e.-center.
Goias, BrazU.-R. II-IV. Map 33.
This perplexing plant has the broad coriaceous stipules and coarse setose pubescence of M. claussenii var. prorsiseta but the moriform capitula, relatively short corolla, and narrow subappressed-setose pod of M. foliolosa sensu lato; possibly it is derived from hybridization between forms of these two closely related species.
I provisionally subordinate it to subsp. brevibractea, in the belief that field-study is required to determine its true status.
227bis.
Mimosa sp. [M. indecora Bameby, in sched.,
nom. nud.].—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros, ±3 km e. of Alto Paraiso on road to Nova Roma, 7.
III.73 (fl + fr annot.), JV.
R. Anderson (with Kalin Arroyo, Hill, Reis dos Santos & Souza) 6600, NY, UB.
Resembling M. foliolosa var. foederalis in appressed setose pubescence and number of pinnae, but leaflets of longer pinnae more numerous, capitula moriform prior to anthesis, andpo^densely setose overall, not merely strigose; lf-formula v-viii/27-35, the longer lf-stks 3-8 cm, randomly spiculate between pinna-pairs, the rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-5.5 cm, the longer lfts (4-)5- 7 X 1.2-1.5 mm; peduncles 2-3 cm; capitula without filaments ±9 mm diam.; corolla only ±4 mm.
This plant, which I am unable to refer to any of the several Pachycarpae found within a few kilometers radius of Alto Paraiso, was found in cerrado on a hillside at 1350 m, flowering in March.
It seems to belong to the M. foliolosa complex, but has random interpinnal spicules on the leaf-stalk, not seen elsewhere in this group.
The moriform capitula suggest M. foliolosa var. paranani, but the pinnae are much fewer.
More material is required to demonstrate its aflinity and status.
228.
Mimosa pachycarpoides Malme, Ark. Bot. 23A(13): 53, fig. 9.
1931.-"[Brazil.
Mato Grosso:] Santa Anna da Chapada .
.
.
17.
V. 1903 ([Iter RegneU.] II: s.n.,
fmctibus immaturis omata)."—Holotypus, S! = NY Neg. 11848.
Amply microphyllidious unarmed shrubs ± I m tall, the few-branched terete lustrous brown stems and lf-axes thinly pilose with basally dilated and backwardly spurred, narrowly ascending tapering setae to 1-2 mm, neither puberulent nor glandular-setulose, the subconcolorous, when dry brown, lustrous lfts glabrous except for random cilia near the pulvinule, the inflorescence not seen at anthesis, the fruiting peduncles solitary in If-axUs, immersed in foUage.
Stipules firm erect, narrowly lanceolate 5-7.5 x 0.6-1.4 mm, glabrous facially, setose-cUiolate, persistent.
Leafstalks (5-)6-10 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 2-6 x 0.8-1.3 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-10 mm, the ventral groove continuous between pinna-pairs (spicules 0); pinnae 10-20-jug., a little decrescent at each end of lf-stk, the rachis of longer ones 14-22 mm, the interfoliolar segments 1-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 12-16-jug., the small first pair usually close to pulvinus but sometimes represented by subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.5 mm, the plane blades all narrowly oblong obtuse, the larger 2.5-5 x 0.8-1.4 mm, 2.5-3.6 times as long as wide, all veinless above, the centric midrib faintly raised beneath.
Peduncles in fruit stout 12-26 mm; receptacle of capitulum ±5-7 mm long; bracts and fls unknown.
Pods 1-2 per receptacle, sessile, in profile oblong from broadly cuneate base, compressed but turgid, 35-55 x 14-16 mm, the replum to 5-6 mm wide, at apex abmptly contracted into an erect cusp 2 — 4 mm, the dark brown subligneous valves together with replum thinly scabrous with basally dilated comma-shaped setulae less than 1 mm, when ripe separating from replum entire; seeds 7-10, irregularly compressedobovoid 5.5-6.5 X 3.5-4.5 mm, the testa light brown smooth, scarcely lustrous, the line of the pleurogram submarginal.
In campo sujo on sandy soil, near 600-700 m, known only from Chapada dos Guimaraes n.-e. of Cuiaba, Mato Grosso, Brazil.-Fl. ±11; fr.
VVI.
Mimosa pachycarpoides is known to me from the fruiting type, collected in May, 1903, from a sterile topotype collected by Malme in October ofthe same year, and from one modem specimen (Mori 16807.
NY), at the same stage of maturity as the type and virtually replicating it.
These plants are plainly related to M. foliolosa sensu lato, and in particular to M. foliolosa var. gravida, which has a similarly large fmit girdled by a massive replum.
The species appears to differ from var. gravida in lack of pubemlence and gland-tipped setulae, in shorter, fewer-foliolate pinnae, in wholly glabrous (or only residually ciliolate) leaffets, and in the basally spurred setae of stem and leaf-stalks.
A full comparison must be deferred until ffowers are obtained, when an evaluation of taxonomic rank will become appropriate.
229.
Mimosa auriberbis Bameby, sp. nov., affinitatis verae ignotae, foliorum et infforescentiae forma adspectuque cum M. setosissima comparabilis, sed statura fruticosa submetrali (nec arborescenti), ramulorum annotinorum epidermide haud exfolianti, glandulis per pubem sparsis nullis, calycisque ore longe setosociliato (nec glabro) diversa; a M. rava, exacte sympatrica et forsan propius affini, notulis in illae diagnosi explicatis abstat.—Brazil.
Distrito Federal: dry hills ±55 km e. of Brasilia near road to Planaltina, 13.
IX.1964 (ff jun), Irwin & Soderstrom 677^.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, COL, F, IAN, LIL, MO, NY, U. Erect shrub ± 1 m with leafless sticklike old stems to ±6 mm diam. and short homotinous branchlets bearing few large lvs crowded around a short pseudoraceme of globose capitula, at once minutely villosulous and, except for faces of very numerous small crowded lfts, densely pilose throughout with loosely ascending, finely tapering lutescent setae ±3-5 mm, the inflorescence golden-barbate, nowhere glandular.
Stipules lance-acuminate 5-10 x 1.5-2 mm, the firm caducous blades densely setose dorsally, glabrous chocolate-brown within.
Leaf-stalks 9-20 cm, the petiole including obese hard pulvinus 5-7 x 1- 1.8 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 8-12 mm, the ventral groove bridged between pinnapairs but spicules 0; pinnae 13-22-jug., strongly decrescent proximally, less so distally, the rachis of longer ones 3.5-5.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.6-1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 35-50- jug., the first pair next to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades narrowly oblong obtuse, the longer ones 3.5-5.5 x 0.8-1.2 mm, aU faintly 3^-nerved from pulvinule, finely setose-ciliate.
Peduncles ±4 cm, most of them subtended at early anthesis by a nascent If, the pods probably axUlary and immersed in hysteranthous foliage; capitula without filaments ±13 mm diam., prior to anthesis densely golden-setose overall; bracts narrowly elliptic ± 6 x 1 mm, hispid on back and margins with setae to 3 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lowest ones staminate; calyx 0.7 mm, the glabrous tube concealed by a ring of bristles arising from mdimentary pedicel, the tmncate rim densely ciliate with setae ±2 mm; corolla ±6 mm, the narrowly funnelform tube glabrous, the ovate, distally callous and incurved lobes ±1.5 mm, on back proximally setulose and distally setose; filaments pink, monadelphous through 1-1.3 mm, exserted ±9 mm; ovary pubescent; pod unknown.
In cerrado on dry hillsides near or above 700 m, known only from the type-collection from the headwaters of rio S. Bartolomeu in Distrito Federal, Brazil.-H. IX-X(-?).
I describe M. auriberbis with trepidation, being ignorant of the fruit, and in perplexity about its genuine affinities in ser. Pachycarpae; but as I am unable to refer the type to any known species, I presume to call it to the attention of botanists in the Federal District, in the hope that more can be learned about its morphology and dispersal.
In some respects it recalls the microphyllidious forms of M. claussenii, but has leaves scarcely half as long. In detail of the flower, it seems close to sympatric M. rava, which see for comment on differences.
In the diagnosis I have compared it with M. setosissima, superficially similar in leaves crowded at the end of the branches and in number and size of pinnae and leaflets; but M. auriberbis is, so far as known, a much smaller shrub with bark not exfoliating from year-old branches.
The type-collection of M. auriberbis had been distributed to the herbaria listed above before I commenced my study of the genus.
The isotypes should be found there among unidentified Mimosae.
230.
Mimosa rava Bameby, sp. nov., inter Pachycarpas microphyllidias statura parva, pinnis paucis plemmque 3-7-jugis, insuper pube densa duplici e villis minutis griseis setisque validis eglandulosis constanti praestans. ab aflini et exacte sympatrica M. auriberbi stipulis angustis (0.5-0.9 nec 1.5-2 mm latis) intus villosulis (nec castaneis glabris), foliomm axi primario 2-5.5 (nec 9-20) cm longo pinnisque 4-8 (nec 13-22)-jugis primo intuitu diversa.—Brazil.
Distrito Federal: dry hills ±55 km e. of BrasUia near road to Planaltina, 13.
IX.1964 (fl ± fr immat), Irwin & Soderstrom 6772.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, RB, S, US. Erect unarmed, awkwardly branched, densely foliolate shrublets 3-5 dm, densely villosulous and hispid with fine erect gray villi less than 0.5 mm and spreading-ascending strong yellowish setae to 2-3.5 mm, at times mixed with random minute gland-tipped setulae, the small crowded lfts softly pubescent on both faces, weakly setoseciliolate, the inflorescence a small leafy-bracteate or shortly exserted pseudoraceme of subglobose capitula.
Stipules stiffly erect, narrowly lance-attenuate 4-9 X 0.5-0.9 mm, pubescent both within and without, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-5.5 cm, the discolored pulvinus and petiole together 3- 6 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-10 mm, the ventral groove continuous between pinnapairs (spicules 0); pinnae 4-7(-8)-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 25-55 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments ± 1 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 26-47-jug., the proximal pair not more than 0.5 mm distant from a pair of subulate or subfoliaceous paraphyllidia, all in outline Unear-oblong obtuse, the longer ones 4.5-5.5 x 0.9- 1.2 mm, at maturity faintly 3-nerved dorsally.
Peduncles both solitary and geminate 2-4 cm; capitula without filaments 9-11 mm diam., prior to anthesis hispid with emergent bracts; bracts linear-attenuate 3-6 x 0.3-0.5 mm, setose dorsally and setose-ciliate;y/ovv^r^ 4-5-merous diplostemonous, the proximal ones staminate and a little shorter than the rest; calyx-tube 0.4-0.5 mm, ciliate around the vestigial pedicel and both around and extemally just below the rim with fine setae to ±1 mm; corolla 3.8-5.2 mm, the funnelform tube glabrous extemally, the ovate, subapically callous lobes 1.3-1.5 mm, loosely finely setulose dorsally; filaments pale pink, monadelphous through 0.8-1.1 mm, exserted to 7-9 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong or oblong-eUiptic 30-50 x 10 mm, strongly compressed, the replum ±1-1.3 mm wide, commonly contracted at apex into a stout cusp 1-3 mm (this sometimes 0), the valves (not seen fully ripe) low-coUiculate over ±9-12 transverse seeds, composed of livid exocarp and stiflly papery endocarp each ±0.1 mm thick, the valves and replum alike variably villosulous but equably hispid overall with stout ascending tapered yellowish setae ± 2-4 mm; dehiscence and seeds not seen, but the valves most probably detached entire from replum.
On dry hillsides in cerrado, 700-1000 m, known only from the type-locality on sources of rio S. Bartolomeu in Distrito Federal, Brazil.— H. VIII-IX. Mimosa rava and M. auriberbis, which were collected together and are known only from this one place, seem closely related, but are so different in leaf-formula (as given in diagnosis), as well as in quality of leaf-pubescence, form of stipules and size of capitula, that it seems impossible to conceive of them as conspecific.
The plants bear a strong resemblance in habit to the more paucipinnate forms of M.foliolosa var. foederalis, but the leaflets are much more numerous, more crowded, and densely villosulous on both faces.
Nevertheless, when better known, M. rava may emerge as no more than an extreme satellite of the M. foliolosa complex.
Pentamerous flowers in this species seem to occur only at random among more normal tetramerous ones.
231.
Mimosa leiocephala Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 404.
1842.-"Goyaz, Gardner, n. 3706."—Holotypus, collected at Natividade, lat. 1 r30'S, in I or II. 1840 (fl), K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Negs.
7907.
11653; isotypi, ^B = F Neg. 1388\ BM! G! P! W! M. leiocephala sensu Bentham, 1875: 439, 1876: 386.
Erect shrubs attaining 2 m, the homotinous stems, lf-stks dorsally and axes of simple pseudoracemes of globose capitula thinly strigose with forwardly appressed, basally thickened setae to ±1-1.5 mm, the plane thick-textured lfts glabrous lustrous facially, minutely ciliolate, the inflorescence at anthesis efoliate and exserted but leafy in fmit.
Stipules firm lanceolate ±4-7 x 1-1.5 mm, glabrous except for scant marginal setae, obscurely nerved, tardily deciduous.
Leafstalks of major cauline lvs 4.5-10.5 cm, those approaching the inflorescence progressively or abmptly shorter, of uppermost lvs only 1.5-3 cm, the petiole including firm pulvinus 2-6 mm, the interpinnal segments (6-)8-10 mm; pinnae of primary lvs 5-15-, of uppermost lvs only 3- 4-jug., subdecrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 3-4.5 cm, their interfoliolar segments to 1.5-2 mm; spicules 0; lfts of longer pinnae ±21-33-jug., the first pair ±0.5 mm distant from minute subulate paraphyllidia, the blades narrowly oblong obtuse or deltately subacute, the longer ones 3-5.2 x 0.8-1.4 mm, 3.5- 4 times as long as wide, the subcentric midrib obscurely elevated dorsally, the ventral face veinless.
Peduncles mostly geminate 1.5-2.5 cm; capitula without filaments 6-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts oblanceolate 1.5- 2.3 mm, glabrous except for minute random capitate cilia; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx membranous turbinate-campanulate 0.6-0.7 mm, the low-deltate teeth at most 0.1 mm, tipped with a minute setula or glabrous; corolla narrowly fiinnelform glabrous ± 3 mm, the oblong-ovate cymbiform lobes ±1.4 x 0.8 mm, a little thickened and hooded at tip; filaments presumably pink, (?) free to base, exserted 4-10 mm.
Pods sessile oblong, in profile 40-47 x 12-13 mm, the replum nearly 2 mm wide, produced into a subulate beak ±2 mm, the low-convex valves consisting of cmstaceous endocarp ±0.1 mm thick and livid exocarp 0.5 mm thick, when ripe dark brown extemally and like the replum strigose with forwardly appressed thick-based tapering setae ± 1 mm, separating entire from replum; seeds broadly compressed-ellipsoid, in wide profile 6-6.5 x 4.5 mm, the testa lustrous brown.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be expected in cerrado near 500 m, known only from the environs of Natividade, on an e. affluent of rio Tocantins near 11°30'S, in n.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-H. I-II(-?); fr.
VI-VII. A modem collection of M. leiocephala from Natividade (Macedo 3842, NY) has shown that Bentham correctly foretold the nature of the pod, which closely resembles that ofM.foliolosa sensu lato.
In most other respects M. leiocephala simulates M. foliolosa var. foederalis, and can only be extracted from the orbit of M. foliolosa by virtue of the dorsally glabrous floral bracts and the perfectly glabrous corollas.
The significance of this precarious difference, which up to the present appears correlated with dispersal, will need reappraisal as more is learned about the Pachycarpae of upland central Goias.
232.
Mimosa nitens Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 404.
1842.-"BrazU, PohV\ the locality expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 385.
1846 to: "in provincia Goyazensi .
.
. ad rio Trahiras."
-Holotypus, Pohl d.l464 = 1737, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1905; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54850, NY! W (labelled "Crixas, Trahiras")! M. nitens sensu Bentham, 1876: 439.
Amply leafy unarmed shrubs or subshrubs 1.5- 2 m, the stout lustrous homotinous stems hispid with erect or incurved-ascending tapering setae to 2-7 mm and rarely also minutely villosulous, the lf-stks and axes of infforescence more shortly setose, the foliage subconcolorous, the plane, when dry brown lustrous lfts glabrous on both faces, marginally thinly villosulous or setuloseciliolate, the inflorescence a few-branched panicle of pseudoracemes elevated ± 2 ^ dm beyond contemporaneous leaves.
Stipules firm lanceolate or ovate 3-6 x 1-2.5 mm, either glabrous or setulose dorsaUy, early dry deciduous.
Leafstalks (1.5-)2-9 cm, dorsally rounded, openly shallow-sulcate ventrally, the petiole including livid wrinkled pulvinus 5-22 x 1.5-2 mm, the longer interpinnal segments (3-)5-16 mm, the ventral sulcus bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae (2-)3-7(-8)-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 6-11 cm, the first pair of lfts 1-2 mm distant from subulate (at times obscure or obsolescent) paraphyllidia, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-2.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 35^5-jug., in outline narrowly lance-oblong obtuse from dilated auriculate base, straight or sUghtly arched forward, the larger ones 8-14 X i.5_3.5(-4) mm, aU weakly 5-7-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib and adjacent primary nerve on each side of it produced nearly to blade apex, the posterior ones much shorter.
Peduncles 1.5-3(-4.5) cm; capitula without filaments 9-10 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts narrowly or broadly rhombicoblanceolate 2.5-5 X 0.5-1.5 mm, always setose-ciliate but dorsally either setulose or glabrate, either equalling or surpassing the fl-buds; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate and slightly shorter than the distal bisexual ones; calyx 0.5-0.85 mm, setulose extemally, the orifice ciliate with setae to 0.8-1.4 mm; corolla narrowly funnelform 4-5 mm, the tube glabrous, the ovate distaUy subcallous and dorsally setulose lobes 1.1-1.5 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through ±0.7-1 mm around stipe of pilosulous ovary, exserted 7-13 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, ascending, subsessile or contracted into a stipe to 3 mm, in profile oblong-elUptic 30-45 X 8-14 mm, abmptly contracted at apex into a stout subulate cusp ±3 mm, the replum 1-1.5 mm wide, the low-convex stiffly papery, extemally nigrescent and thinly setulose, internally rufescent valves separating entire from replum, the cavity (5-)6-9 seeded; seeds not seen.
In cerrado, 700-800 m, apparently local on upper forks of rio Tocantins in lat. 12°30'-l 4°30'S in centr. Goias (Arraias, Trahiras, Niquelandia), BrazU.-n. I-III. Mimosa nitens has the efoliate paniculate infforescence of M. setosa sensu lato or M. melanocarpa, but differs at anthesis by relatively few pairs of pinnae, and in fmit by valvate dehiscence of the pod.
As often happens in Mimosa, a reduced number of pinnae is compensated by greater length, the whole leaf-formula being characteristic in high degree.
The type-collection has simply setose, otherwise hairless stems, but one modem collection (Irwin 34991, NY) includes both exactly typical individuals and others with stems at once more shortly hispid and villosulous.
233.
Mimosa lithoreas Bameby, sp. nov., caulibus homotinis cum pseudoracemi efoliati terminalis axi flexiliter inter campi udi gramina humifusis, foliis pedunculisque meridiem versus arrectis, ergo habitu toto inter affines praestans, leguminisque lati planocompressi replo angusto notabilis.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Morro das Pedras ±25 km n.-e. of Patrocinio, in wet campo, 1050 m, 28.1.1970 (fl), Irwin (with Onishi, Fonseca, Souza, Reis dos Santos & Ramos) 25461. —Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Unarmed, amply leafy subshrubs with procumbent caudex-branches up 2 dm giving rise to pliantly humifuse simple herbaceous stems 3- 5 dm, these leafy toward base or upward to near middle, thence efoliate but bearing at each node a pair of persistent stipules and (1-)2 vertically erect long-pedunculate globose capitula, the stems, lf-axes and peduncles all thinly setulose or distally silky-pUose with comma-shaped or weak flexuous flagelliform setae to 3-4 mm, the lfts glabrous and resinously lustrous.
Stipules lanceolate 6-14 x 1.5-4 mm, firm livid-castaneous, extemally thinly setose or medially glabrescent, intemally glabrous lustrous, all long persistent.
Leaf-stalks subvertically erect (7-)9- 17 cm, the petiole 2.5-5.5 cm, at middle 0.7-1.2 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 7- 17 mm, the shallow ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae (5-)8- 15-jug., basipetally decrescent from a point beyond mid-lf and a little so distally, the rachis of longer ones 2-4 cm, its longer interfoliolar segments 1-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (16-)20- 28-jug., the first pair next to pulvinus or up to 0.7 mm distant from it (paraphyllidia 0), aU in outline linear obtuse or apiculate, straight or subdecurved, the longer ones 3-5.5 x 0.6-1 mm, all veinless above, the subcentric midrib sometimes weakly prominulous dorsally.
Peduncles 4.5-7.5 cm; capitula globose or squatly ovoid, without filaments 11-12 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts oblance-elliptic 4.5-6 x 1-1.3 mm, setulose-ciliate but otherwise glabrous, dorsally resinous lustrous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lowest staminate and slightly smaller; calyx campanulate 0.7-0.8 mm, glabrous extemally, the subtruncate orifice with a few minute cilia; corolla 4 ^ .
7 mm, glabrous, the tube rather broadly funnelform, the ovate membranous 1-nerved lobes 1-1.2 mm, a little hooded at apex; filaments magenta-lavender fading pale lilac, weakly monadelphous at very base, the longer ones exserted 9-10.5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods (J. E. de Oliveira, R 130645) 1-3 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblongor oblance-elliptic 35-45 x 14-15 mm, shortly abruptly subulate-beaked by thickened persistent style-base, piano-compressed, the replum 2.5-3 mm wide, the coriaceous valves sublustrously nigrescent, thinly appressed-strigulose with fine bulbous-based setulae mostly less than 1 mm, separating from the replum in one piece; seeds ± 5-6 per pod, plumply compressed-ovoid 6-6.5 X 5 X 2.5 mm, the testa glossy-castaneous, the pleurogram almost as broad as the seed-face.
Locally abundant in brejo at ±1050 m, apparently localized on the sources of rio Paranaiba in transfranciscan Minas Gerais, Brazil, presently known from only two stations, at Morro das Pedras and in vicinity of Coromandel.—Fl.
I-II(-?); ripe fmit (?-)VII. In foUage M. lithoreas resembles some forms ofM. albolanata, but the humifuse stems threading through grasses of wet campo, the broad persistent stipules, and the capitula conelike in praefloration are features foreign to that species.
The broad piano-compressed pod with relatively narrow replum is like that of no other member of ser. Pachycarpae.
Notable also are the resinously lustrous but nowhere capitate-glandular leaflets and floral bracts, and the suppression of paraphyllidia at base of the pinna-rachis.
234.
Mimosa humivagans Bameby, sp. nov., M. prorepenti in altiplanitie montium Sa.
Geral do Parana subsympatricae ut videtur affinis, sed foliorum subsessilium petiolo communi 25-55 (nec 55-125) mm, petiolo vero 2-3.5 (nec 4-11) mm longis, foliorum formula viixii/10-15 (nec xi-xxvi/26-50), capituUs absque filamentis 6-7 (nec 8-10) mm diam., necnon calyce ciliis inclusis coroUae octies (nec ter) breviori distans.—Brazil.
Goias: Sa.
Geral do Parana ± 3 km s. of S. Joao Alian^a, 16.
III. 1971 (fl, ineunte fr), Irwin (with Harley & G. L. Smith) i7939.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, K, NY, R, US. Functionally herbaceous unarmed subshrubs from xylopodium, the pliantly humifuse, distally few-branched stems attaining ±15 dm, together with Ifand inflorescence-axes at once densely puberulent with small incurved pallid hairs and hispid with erect tapering tawny setae to 1.5-3 mm, nowhere glandular, the subconcolorous brownish-olivaceous lfts glabrous on both faces, minutely ciliolate, the lax pseudoracemes of small globose capitula efoliate or almost so, terminal to main stem and branches, exserted 1.5-3 dm from developed foliage.
Stipules widely ascending or deflexed, lanceolate 3-5 x 0.7-1.1 mm, the firm blades indistinctly 5-7-nerved, puberulent on both faces, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaves subsessile, the whole lf-stk 2.5-5.5 cm, the petiole proper and pulvinus together only 2- 3.5 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 3.5-6 mm, the ventral groove bridged between pinnapairs but spicules 0; pinnae of larger lvs 7-12- jug., a little decrescent at each end of lf-stk, the axis of longer ones 13-21 mm, the interfoliolar segments to 0.8-1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 10-15-jug., little graduated, the smaU first pair 0.2-0.6 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades narrowly oblong obtuse from proximally obtusangulate base, those at mid-rachis ±3-5 X 0.8-1.3 mm and ±4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, the subcentric midrib and one short posterior nerve weakly prominulous beneath.
Peduncles mostly solitary, a few geminate, 20-27 mm; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-oblanceolate to ±1.5 mm, beyond middle pectinately setose-ciliate, the cilia basally confluent; flowers 4-merous, 8-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx shallowly campanulate or bowl-shaped 0.3 mm deep, the tube glabrous extemally, the rim with a few setulae ±0.2 mm; corolla to 4 mm, subcylindric, the ovate subacute, shallowly concave 1-nerved lobes 0.9 x 0.6 mm, appressed-setulose extemally; filaments lavender-pink, monadelphous through nearly 1 mm, the 4 longer ones exserted ±7.5 mm; ovary foUowing fertilization densely coarsely setose; the full-grown pod unknown.
Mimosa humivagans and sibling M. prorepens have been collected close together, but in spite of resemblances in habit and vesture I cannot construe them as other than distinct species, so different are the numbers of pinnae and the proportions of calyx to corolla, as described in the foregoing diagnosis.
The ripe pod of neither is yet known, so that their affinities within sect. Pachycarpae remain open to revision.
In many respects they resemble aspects of the polymorphic M. foliolosa, but differ collectively in pliantly humifuse stems arising anew each year from a woody rootstock.
In this growth-habit and further in subsessile leaves M. humivagans recalls M. (Paucifoliatae) pratincola, but differs from it (inter alia) by hispidly setose (not simply puberulent) stems and leaf-stalks, absence of paraphyllidia, leaf-formula attaining vii-xii/10-15 (not v-viii/7-10), and pubescent corolla-lobes and ovary.
235.
Mimosa prorepens Bameby, sp. nov., leguminis forma ac structura ffosculisque parvis ut videtur M. accedenti propiuscule affinis, sed caulibus diffuse procumbentibus (nec e xylopodio virgatim erectis), pube gynoecio excepto plerumque eglandulosa, coroUaeque lobulis extus setulosis (nec glabris) manifeste diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: in campo ±10 km s. of S. Joao da AUan^a, 17.
III. 1971 (vixff),Irwin (with Harley & G. L. Smith) 5206^.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, U S . - Ibid.,
eadem die (fr jun.,
leguminibus multis galla deformatis), Irwin & al. 32041.—Paratypi, G, K, NY, P, R, UB, US. M. reflexa Harms ex Glaziou, BuU.
Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 185, 1906, nom. nud.-"Guariroba .
.
.
Goyaz, [Glaziou] n. 21044.'' Specimina authent.: +B = F Neg. 7^52! K! = NY Neg. 11650.
M. planaltoana Harms ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 185.
1906, nom. nud.-"Entre le rio Tocantim et Fazenda do Paraiso . .. Goyaz, [Glaziou] n. 270^5."—Specimina authent.: +B = F Neg. 1424\ K! P! Unarmed, functionally herbaceous subshrubs, the homotinous stems (4-)5-15 dm, procumbently radiating from a xylopodium and distally incurved or assurgent, simple or branched above middle, the cauline and foliar axes at once villosulous with fine incurved plain hairs and hispid with subhorizontal tapering yellowing setae to 2- 4(-5) mm mixed or not with shorter glandular setulae, the lfts villous-ciliolate esetose, the pod with some glandular setulae, the small plumply ellipsoid capitula axillary to reduced distal lvs or forming a well exserted pseudoraceme.
Stipules either widely spreading-ascending or reflexed, lanceolate or Unear-attenuate (4.5-11.5 x 0.5- 1.6 mm, indistinctly 5-7-nerved, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of primary cauline lvs 5.5- 12.5 cm (of distal lvs often shorter, no further described), the petiole 4-11 x 0.7-1.4 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 4-7(-8) cm, the ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0:/7z>2«^^ of longer lvs 11-26-jug., decrescent proximally but scarcely so distally, the rachis of longer ones 20-35(-40) mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (26-)28-50-jug., the first pair 0.3-0.7 mm distant from the minute or rudimentary paraphyllidia, all in outline narrowly oblong obtuse, the longer ones 2.5-4.5 (-5.5) x 0.5-1 mm, aU glabrous lustrous on upper or on both faces.
Peduncles solitary or geminate (1.5-)2-5.5 cm; capitula without filaments 10-15 x 8-10 mm, prior to anthesis either conelike or hispidulous with emergent bract-tips; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1.5-3.2 X 0.25-0.4 mm, setulose on back and margin; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx 0.4- 0.5 mm, extemally glabrous, the rim weakly setulose-ciliolate, the tube and cilia together ± V a as long as corolla; corolla 3.1-3.6 mm, the narrowly funnelform tube glabrous, the ovate concave lobes ±0.8 mm, densely setulose dorsally.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) 1-4 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile broadly linear piano-compressed ±40-45 X 9-10 mm, shortly cuspidate at apex, the replum ±1 mm wide, the valves only ±0.1 mm thick in section but differentiated into papery endocarp and lustrous livid exocarp of subequal thickness, the valves and replum alike finely villosulous and thinly hispid with ascending yellowish plain setae to 2-2.5 mm mixed with random delicate and shorter gland-tipped setulae, the dehiscence and ultimate nature of ripe valves unknown.
In campo, 950-1150 m, apparently localized in highland s.-e. Goias, Brazil, on Sa.
Geral do Parana within a radius of ± 10 km of S. Joao da Alianfa near 14°35-50'S, and in the upper Commba basin at 15°50'S.-H. X-IV. Mimosa prorepens is one of three planaltine Pachycarpae with procumbently humifuse herbaceous stems arising annuaUy from woody roots, and in one or other focus of its apparently bicentric range it is sympatric with each of the other two.
The fmits of none of these three mimosas are completely known, and it is possible, but I think unlikely, that they are less closely related than I have assumed from common habit of growth and from similarities in stipule, foliage, ffower, and at least shortly monadelphous filaments.
The differential characters of these habitally similar species, M. humivagans sympatric on the sources of rio Parana north of the Federal District and M. pseudofoliolosa potentially so on the upper Corumba south of the District, are mentioned at length under the protologues of these species.
Outside the humifuse group I find suggestive similarities between M. prorepens and M. accedens, especially in aspect and relatively thin texture of the nearly mature pod.
The latter differs decisively, however, in virgately erect stems and glabrous corolla-lobes.
236.
Mimosa pseudofoliolosa Bameby, sp. nov., affinitatis fructu deficiente adhuc incertae, sed adspectu toto verosimillime Pachycarpis referenda, foliomm formula foliolisque minimis M. foliolosae var. foliolosae accedens, ab ea caulibus prostratis ultra medium paniculatim ramosis, petiolis communibus brevioribus 4- 7 (nec 7-13) cm longis, capitulisque minimis (absque filamentis 4-5 mm diam.) diversa.— Brazil.
Goias: Samambaia, rio Corumba, 15.
L1967 (fl), E. P. Heringer 11314.-Holotypus (2 sheets), UB; isotypi, MG, NY (2 sheets).
Of unrecorded stature but apparently a functionally herbaceous subshrub from xylopodium, the prostrate unarmed stems freely branched distally and passing into a panicle of efoliate pseudoracemes elevated 1-3 dm above developed lvs, the stems and all axes of lvs and inflorescence densely pilose and viscid-villosulous with fine erect plain yellowish setae to 2-2.5 mm, minute pallid incurved hairs, and filiform erect glandtipped setulae to 0.8-1.2 mm, the minute concolorous, when dry brownish sublustrous lfts ciliolate with plain and gland-tipped setulae but facially glabrous, the small capitula subglobose.
Stipules firm reflexed lanceolate ±4-6 x l mm, pubescent dorsally like adjacent stem, persistent.
Leafstalks of major cauline lvs 4-7 cm, the petiole and livid pulvinus together 1.5-3 mm, the interpinnal segments 2.5-4 mm, the narrow ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae 12-17-jug., of subequal length, the rachis (5-)7-10 mm, the interfoliolar segments ±0.5 mm; lfts 14-18-jug., the first and last pairs smaller but the rest subequilong, the first pair 0.2-0.3 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all oblong obtuse from semicordate base, the largest 1.2-1.7 x 0.4-0.7 mm, ±2.7 times as long as wide, all indistinctly costate dorsally, otherwise veinless.
Peduncles solitary and geminate 1.7-2.3 cm; capitula including interfloral bracts but without filaments 4-5 mm diam., the linearelliptic bracts 2-2.5 X 0.3-0.4 mm, distally glandular-pubemlent, prior to anthesis projecting beyond the obovoid fl-buds; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate; calyx 0.5- 0.8 mm, glabrous extemally, the obscurely denticulate rim either glabrous or with a few minute cUia; corolla turbinate 2.5-3.1 mm, the almost plane nerveless lobes 1.2 x l mm, thinly puberulent extemally with plain and gland-tipped setulae; filaments pink, shortly monadelphous around base of glabrous ovary, exserted 4.5-6.5 mm; pod unknown.
On graveUy soil in certado, near 1000 m, known only from the type-locality on the headwaters of rib.
Samambaia, a source-tributary of rio S. Marcos, at 16°10'S, 47°35'W in s.-e. Goias, BrazU.- Fl.
I-II(-?).
This ambiguous mimosa resembles M. foliolosa var. foliolosa in short pinnae and minute leaflets, but differs in prostrate, paniculately branched stems, shorter leaf-stalks, and very small capitula.
In habit it recalls M. gracilis, but its stipules suggest (in absence of the pod, which would be decisive) much closer affinity to M. prorepens, from which it differs in pronounced viscid-villosulous indumentum of stem, leaf and inflorescence, in subsessile leaves, in pinnae 2- 3 times shorter, leaflets less than half as many (14-18-, not 26-50-jug.) and minute leaflets (less than 2, not 2.5-5.5 mm long).
237.
Mimosa antrorsa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 403.
1842.-"BrazU, Pohr\ the locality particularized in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 384.
1876: "in provincia Minas Geraes ad Pedro Pereira [=Pedro Peiro, near Paracatu]."
— Holotypus, Pohl d. 1426 = 2891, K! = NY Neg. 1903; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 13841 F! = F Neg. 54800, M! NY! US! W ! - M. adversa Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 439.
1875 & in Martius, 1876, I.e., nom. substitut. illegit. [Bentham considered the neo-Latin antrorsus, formed after the pattem of extrorsus, corrupt usage, but the Code makes no provision for rejecting such words, and antrorsus, meaning anteversus, here alluding to ascending aculei, has become respectable with time.] Shrubs and treelets 2-4 m with stiffly ascending, densely and amply leafy virgate branches, armed along prominent blunt cauline ribs and occasionally also along dorsal rib of some lf-stks with forwardly incurved, proximally puberulent aculei to (1-) 1.5-2.5 mm, except for glabrous upper (and at times lower) face of lfts minutely villosulous and also densely finely subappressedsetose overall, the setose element of the vesture lutescent, the pseudoracemose infforescence of globose or plumpy ovoid capitula usually foliate proximally but distally exserted up to 1-2 dm from foliage.
Stipules erect firm lanceolate ± involute 4-11 X 1.5-2 mm, densely setulose dorsally, thinly so within, deciduous with or before the associated If.
Leaf-stalks 4—15 cm, often progressively shorter distally along branches, the petiole including (or largely composed of) hard, densely appressed-setose pulvinus 4-11 mm, the longer interpinnal segments (4-)5-10 mm; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae 8-15(-17)-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones (2-)2.5-6.5(-8) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 30- 55(-70)-jug., the proximal pair close to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all linear-oblong, either acute or obtuse-apiculae, the longer ones 3.5-5.5 x 0.6-1 mm, the blades dark-olivaceous and veinless above, beneath paler and faintly 2-nerved from pulvinule.
Peduncles solitary or distally geminate (12-) 15-30 mm; capitula without filaments 7.5-10 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse, densely packed ff-buds densely setulose; bracts linear-spatulate or spatulate-oblanceolate 2.5-3 X 0.45-0.65 mm, beyond middle silky-setulose dorsally; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate, the lowest of all slightly smaller than the rest; calyx membranous campanulate 0.5-0.6 mm, the rim with setulae ± as long; corolla 3-3.8 mm, the glabrous tube funnelform, the ovate concave lobes 1.1- 1.4 mm, hooded and callous-thickened at apex, densely silky-setulose dorsally; stamens alternately short and long, monadelphous through 0.45-0.75 around base of pilosulous ovary, the longer set exserted 4-5.5 mm.
Pods 1-4 per capitulum, erect and long-persistent on stout ascending peduncle, in profile narrowly oblong or oblong-oblanceolate 33-55 x 8-12 mm, (7-)8- 12-seeded, cuneately contracted at base into a stipe 2-7 mm, abruptly narrowed at apex into an erect cusp (1-)3-5 mm, the coarsely setulose replum 1.3-1.8 mm wide, the stiffly papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, extemally densely strigose with appressed yellowish setulae, furfuraceous within, when ripe separating entire from replum except at very base, the dehiscence inert; seeds plumply obovoid ±5 x 3.5-4 mm, the smooth testa brown or livid.
In cerrado and in bush islands in campo sujo or brejo, 800-950 m, discontinuously dispersed, mostly in stony soils, on both slopes of upper S. Francisco valley in Minas Gerais, from Grao Mogol w. through Sa. do Cabral to the sources of rio Paracatu, thence w. to head of rio S. Bartolomeu in Distrito Federal, Brazil.-Fl.
XII-IV, the fmits persistent through the year.
Mimosa antrorsa is readily known by the combination of prickly stems, small crowded leaflets, exserted pseudoracemes of capitula, and very densely strigose pods of tawny-yellow hue.
238.
Mimosa adenotricha Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 91.
1846.—"Serra da Lapa [Minas Gerais], Brasil, Riedel.''—l:iolotypus, Riedel 582, collected X.1824 (fl, frjun), K (hb. Benth.)!; isotypus, LE! M. heterotricha Burkart, Darwiniana 18(3-4): 425, figs. 1, 2.
174.—"Brasilia.
Minas Gerais, Serra do Espinha90, G. Hatschbach (et Z. Ahumada) 31.639, flor. fmct.
16.11.1973."-Holotypus, SI (not seen); isotypi, NY! US! M. adenotrichasensuBentham, 1875: 439, 1876: 385.
Shrubs attaining 2 m, the virgate branches armed with scattered antrorsely curved, proximally pubemlent aculei to 1.5-2.5 mm and together with lf-axes densely gray-villosulous and pilose with both fine attenuate and palUdly glandtipped setae, the olivaceous foliage cinereous except for glabrate upper face oflfts, the subglobose capitula either largely axillary or, due to reduction of distal lvs, pseudoracemose and well exserted.
Stipules erect lanceolate 4-6.5 x 0.7-1 mm, the firm, early deciduous blade densely pubescent dorsally, glabrous castaneous within.
Leaf-stalks 3-8 cm, the petiole 5-8 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 4-8 mm; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae of longer lvs (6-)8-13(-16)- jug., proximally decrescent, the rachis of distal ones 15-24(-30) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 16- 25-jug., the first pair less than 0.5 mm from minute paraphyllidia, the thin-textured blades narrowly oblong obtuse, the larger ones 2.3-5 X 0.6- 1.2 mm, all faintly costate dorsally, otherwise veinless.
Peduncles solitary or geminate (1-)2-3 cm; capitula squatly ellipsoid or globose, without filaments 8-11 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts elliptic-oblanceolate 3-5 x 0.6-1.2 mm, dorsally setose and ciliate from base upward;flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the staminate lower ones a little smaller than the rest; calyxtube membranous campanulate 0.5-0.9 mm, the orifice ciliate with setulae to 0.7-1 mm; corollas 3.4-4.2 mm, the lower ones more broadly and the upper more narrowly funnelform, the tube glabrous, the lobes ±1.2 mm, at apex a little thickened and concave, extemally densely pallidsetulose overall; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.6-1.1 mm, exserted 8.5-10.5 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile oblongelUptic obtuse but abmptly cuspidate by persistent style-base 1-3 mm, the body 24-36 x 10- 13 mm, (4-)6-8-seeded, ascending-setose and stipitate-glandular overaU, the replum ±1.8-2 mm wide, the stiffly papery, extemally brownishnigrescent, intemally rufous valves ±0.3 mm thick in section, low-corrugate over seeds, when ripe faUing from the replum entire; seeds plumply obovoid ± 5 x 4 mm, the testa lustrously purplish-castaneous.
In cerrado and campo mpestre on quartzite, 1100-1300 m, locally plentiful on and about the crest of Sa. do Espinha?© between ±18° and 19°30'S in centr. Minas Gerais (Mendanha, Diamantina, Gouveia, Sas. do Frio and da Lapa), BrazU.-H. VIII-IV. Mimosa adenotricha has precisely the aspect of M. foliolosa subsp. pachycarpa, except for the armament of acroscopically curved prickles.
The species is maintained at the taxonomic level at which it was described, but I question whether it is anything more substantial than a local expression of M. foliolosa sensu lato.
A small variation in leaf-formula exists between specimens, perhaps between populations, ofM. adenotricha, but numbers of pinnaand leaflet-pairs are not associated with any other known differential feature, nor are they geographically segregated.
Consequently I regard M. heterotricha, of which relatively high leaf-formula was the only diagnostic mark, as a minor variant.
Burkart's (1974) elegant figure of M. heterotricha is a tme likeness of the majority of known collections of M. adenotricha.
239.
Mimosa albolanata Taubert, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 21: 433.
1896.—Typus infra sub var. albolanata indicatur.
Amply leafy unarmed subshrubs, the stems of the year including terminal, simple or weakly branched pseudoraceme (1-)2-10 dm, either erect and wandlike or stiffly ascending from a xylopodium or from a framework of prostrate, sometimes adventitiously rooting woody tmnks exceptionally attaining 1 m in length, at anthesis either efoliate except for subradical lvs or leafy to middle, but lvs at most flowering nodes hysteranthous, developing pari passu with the pods and becoming longer than them, the cauline and foliar axes variably strigoseor silky-setose with tapering or slenderly flagelliform lustrous setae to 2-6 mm, nowhere glandular, the margin of the facially glabrous, rarely pubemlent lfts varying from glabrous to scabemlous or from villosulous to weakly setose.
Stipules firm, lanceolate or triangular-acuminate (5-)6-17(-19) x (1.5)- 2^.5(-6) mm, densely setose extemally, glabrous castaneous within, either persistent or caducous.
Leafstalks (9-) 13-28 cm, the petiole including obese pulvinus 0.5-3.5(-4) cm, the longer interpinnal segments 10-21 (-26) mm, the ventral groove either continuous or bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae (9-) 10-30(-32)- jug., strongly decrescent proximally but less or scarcely so distally, the rachis of longer ones 3- 7(-9) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (0.8-) 1-2.3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (18-)22- 44(-55)-jug., the first pair close to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all in outUne narrowly oblong but sometimes a little dilated toward oblique base, the larger ones (2.8-)3.2-9 x (0.8-)l-1.8 mm, all smooth and veinless above, often becoming obtusely 3-nerved beneath.
Peduncles solitary or 2-3 together, 0-4.5(-7) cm; capitula broadly ovoid or globose, without filaments 10-16 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike silky-setose; bracts oblanceolate, oblance-elliptic or spatulate 3-6(-8) X 0.5-1.2 mm, setose marginally and at least thinly so dorsally, usually shorter than or equalling the expanded fl, rarely surpassing it; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some lower ones staminate but scarcely shorter; calyx-tube membranous, commonly 0.3-0.8, exceptionally 0.7- 1.5 mm, glabrous extemally, the tmncate or irregularly lobulate rim ciliate with setulae (0.3-)0.5-2.5 mm; corolla (3.5-)4-6 mm, the ovate lobes densely or thinly setulose dorsally; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.7-1.2 mm, the longer ones exserted (7.5-)8-14.5 mm.
Pods (1-)2-8 per capitulum, sessile or almost so, in profile narrowly oblong or oblong-elUptic 25- 50 X 9-15 mm, 5-11-seeded, the replum 1.5-3 mm wide produced into a terminal cusp (1-)1.5- 7 mm (this at times reduced to a scarcely differentiated triangular point), the valves composed of livid exocarp 0.3-0.5 mm and papery-crustaceous endocarp 0.1-0.2 mm thick in section, the replum and valves alike or the latter more densely charged with short tapering or flagelliform, appressed or forwardly ascending setae to (0.5-)0.7-2.5 mm, the tm^gidly low-convex valves separating entire from replum but long-persistent at base; seeds ovate or almost round in broad profile, 3.6-5 x 3-4 mm, the testa smooth lustrous dark-castaneous or livid-nigrescent.
I refer to the polymorphic M. albolanata those planaltine Pachycarpae that differ from compatriot kindred by proximally foliate homotinous stems not over one meter in length arising yearly from a xylopodium or from a humifuse, at times adventitiously rooting framework of woody branches.
The mature plant is a subsessile or prostrate suffrutex that does not, like most forms of M. claussenii and M. foliolosa, acquire erect or ascending defoliate tmnks, but dies back annually to the level of the ground.
At anthesis the erect wandlike or stiffly assurgent, simple or fewbranched fertile stem may be devoid of expanded leaves exept at a few subradical nodes or may bear mature foliage upward to mid-stem.
However, the capitula at anthesis are commonly subtended by a hysteranthously expanding leaf that appears at that time only in primordial form but grows out rapidly thereafter and greatly surpasses the mature fruiting peduncle.
In consequence there are marked differences between plants of one sort collected in flower and in fmit.
Independently of seasonal dimorphism the mutually remote major populations of M. albolanata differ in size and propinquity of leaflets, in length of peduncles, in absolute and proportionate lengths of floral bracts and flowers (and hence in diameter of capitula), in depth of calycine cup and in length of its cilia, and in pubescence of the pods, these as yet incompletely known.
None of the observed differences is tmly constant even within the boundary of a particular locality, and I can discern in the group only an inchoate stage of differentiation.
The key to geographic varieties that follows is imperfectly realized for it fails effectively to distinguish all of them at every stage of maturity.
1.
Key to varieties of M. albolanata Capitula without filaments 10-13 mm diam.; floral bracts 3-5(-6) mm; s.-centr. Goias with Distrito Federal, e. into Minas Gerais.
2.
Lfts relatively smaU and crowded, the longest attaining 3-5 x 0.6-1.2 mm and not over 0.8-1.5 mm apart along rachis; pods densely setose with incurved-ascending setae concealing face of valves.
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 30-44-jug., glabrous on faces, ciliate; Distrito Federal and adj. Goias; Sa. do Cabral in centr. Minas Gerais 239a. var. brasiliana (p. 394).
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 45-55-jug., finely minutely villosulous on faces; Sa.
Dourada, Goias. ... 239b. var. albolanata (p. 395).
2.
Lfts averaging larger and less crowded, the longest attaining 4.5-6.5(-9) x l-l,8(-2) mm and 1-2.3 mm apart along rachis; pods strigose with appressed or very narrowly ascending setae not fully concealing the livid face of valves; Goias w., s. and e. of Distrito Federal, extending into w.-centr. Minas Gerais (near Patrocinio and Paracatu); disjunct on Sa. do Espinha90 in n.-centr. Minas Gerais.
239c. var. paucipinna (p. 395).
Capitula without filaments 15-16 mm diam.; bracts 6-8 mm; Sa. do Fa^ao near 17''45'S in s.-e. Goias.
239d. var. grossiceps (p. 395).
239a. Mimosa albolanata Taubert var. brasiliana Bameby, var. nov., a var. albolanata, caeterius simili sed allopatrica, foliolis minus numerosis (pinnamm longiomm 30—44-, nec 45-55-jugis) utraque facie glabris diversa.— Brazil.
Distrito Federal: road to Paranoa, 10 km s.-e. of BrasUia, 1000 m, 21.
IX.1965 (fl, fr annot.), Irwin (with Souza & Reis dos Santos) 5570.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Stems of current year erect or ascending from diffuse or prostrate trunk and together with extended axis of inflorescence (3-)5-10 dm, the cauline lvs expanding at or immediately after anthesis of subtended capitula; setae of stems and inflorescence-axes to 2.5-5(-6) mm, the young inflorescence shaggy-silky; pinnae of larger lvs 22-32-jug; longer pinnae 3.5-5 cm, their lfts 30- 44-jug. and to ±3-5 x (0.6-)0.8-1.2 mm, aU glabrous facially but ciliolate; capitula without filaments (12-) 13-15 mm diam., the bracts 3-6 mm; pods (22-)25-37 x 10-13 mm, the valves densely hispid with erect-incurved brownish-yellow tapering setae to 1.5-2.5(-4) mm long and at base to 0.2-0.4 mm diam. In cerrado climax and in intermittently burned campo, 950-1250 m, locally plentiful in Distrito Federal, Brazil and in upper Commba valley immediately to the w.; disjunct on Sa. do Cabral in centr. Minas Gerais.—F. IX-III(-V), the pods maturing slowly and long persisting.
This, M. claussenii and M. foliolosa are the three Pachycarpae most abundant in the Federal District.
Although collected repeatedly on the University campus and in relict cerrado within BrasUia city, it has never been satisfactorily named.
In several respects it is intermediate between the other two, having longer pinnae and plumper capitula than M. foliolosa but smaller leaflets and shorter peduncles than M. claussenii.
TheflageUiformtip of setae that cloak the young inflorescence in a sUky fleece is commonly lost in age, so that the fmiting stem appears more shortly and coarsely hispid.
The disjunct population on Serra do Cabral is known from only one coUection (Duarte 7730, NY) in mature fmit and may possibly represent a taxonomically distinct form of M. albolanata.
239b. Mimosa albolanata Taubert var. albolanata.
M. albolanata Taubert, 1896, I.e., sens, str.—"Habitat in montibus Serra Dourada [Goias]: Ule n. 2872."-Holotypus, +B; isotypus, collected 1.1893 (fl), HBG!; probable isotypus, Ule 415, R! Diflerent from var. brasiliana only in slightly more numerous leaflets finely villosulous on both faces as well as ciliolate but the hairs of upper face sometimes reduced to papilli or even suppressed.
In cerrado about sandstone outcrops, near or above 800 m, known only from Sa.
Dourada in s.-centr. Goias, Brazil.-Fl.
I-II. This is weakly distinguished morphologically from var. brasiliana, but in its disjunct habitat seems to be uniformly so.
The earliest collections, made by Burchell in 1828, were referred by Bentham partly (no. 6848, K) to M. claussenii and partly (nos.
6681, 6700-15, K) to M. gardneri, and have contributed to confused notions of the real identity of all these species.
239c. Mimosa albolanata Taubert var. paucipinna (Bentham) Bameby, comb. nov. M. gardneri ? var. paucipinna Bentham in Martius, n . bras. 15(2): 388.
1876.-"Habitat in campis Brasiliae centralis: WeddeU."—Holotypus, annotated by Bentham "Af. gardneri var. paucijuga,'' WeddeU 2510, P! = NY Neg. 11821.
M. gardneri var. gardneri sensu Bentham, 1842: 405, 1876: 387, ex parte, quoad pi. pohlianam, typo excluso.
M. albolanata var. occulta Bameby, nom. nud. in adnot.
Flowering stems either from humistrate, then sometimes adventitiously rooting tmnks, or directly from xylopodium, variably setose or silkysetose, the facially glabrous lfts minutely or weakly ciUolate; pinnae (9-)12-23(-28)-jug., the longer ones 3-7 cm, the lfts 22-40-jug., to 1.5- 2.3 mm apart and the blades attaining 4.5-6.5(-9) X l-1.8(-2) mm; capitula without filaments 10- 14 mm diam., the floral bracts to 3-5(-6) mm; pods ±30-50 X 11-13, scabrous overall with forwardly appressed or narrowly incurved-ascending setae to 0.7-2.5 mm, these separated by spaces greater than the diameter of their dilated base, hence not concealing the fuscous-brown face of valves.
In cerrado and campo rupestre, 1050-1400 m, discontinuously dispersed on islands of sandstone caprock in s.-e. Goias (Sas. dos Pireneus and dos Cristais) and w. and centr. Minas Gerais (Sa. dos (Dculos near Patrocinio and Sa. do Espinha9o near Francisco Sa).—Fl.
XI-III. Somewhat fewer, more distant and generally longer leaflets and commonly thinner, shorter, less silky setose indumentum of the inflorescence together weakly distinguish flowering var. paucipinna from var. brasiliana; but the dark brown, more thinly and shortly scabrous-hispidulous pods (not yet confirmed in distantly disjunct populations in Minas Gerais) are characteristic.
The earliest collections of var. paucipinna, Pohl d. 1469 (K, NY, W), from unknown locality were mistaken by Bentham, who had no means of knowing the great differences in stature, for M. gardneri.
Pohl's specimens consist of the herbaceous part of sessile subshmbs, that is of whole plants short of the woody terrestrial tmnk or the buried xylopodium, and only fortuitously resemble terminal branchlets of arborescent M. gardneri.
They closely resemble modem collections of the population, now well sampled, found on Sa. dos Cristais within ten or fifteen kilometers of Cristalina, and they may well have been obtained there.
The status of the two known populations in Minas Gerais, which appear nearly identical with those of Goias when in flower, may require reassessment when the pod is secured.
239d. Mimosa albolanata Taubert var. grossiceps Bameby, var. nov., cum var. paucipinna omnino congruens nisi capituUs maximis, absque filamentis 15-16 mm diam. bracteisque elongatis 6-8 mm usque longis.—Brazil.
Goias: Sa. do Fagao in Contraforte Geral, ±25 km n.-e. of Catalao, 24.1.1970 (fl), Irwin (with Onishi, Fonseca, Souza, Reis dos Santos & Ramos) 25265.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Habit and foliage of var. paucipinna, but the massive capitula 15-16 mm in diam. without filaments and the bracts 5-6 mm, the corollas 5.5-6 mm; pod unknown.
In cerrado, 875-900 m, known only from Sa. do Fa9ao near 17°45'S, in s.-e. Goias, Brazil.— H. I-II. The massive capitula of var. grossiceps suggest those of M. claussenii var. prorsiseta, but the almost scapiform inflorescence, at anthesis leafless beyond the first few nodes, conforms with M. albolanata sensu lato.
The pod will be decisive in evaluating the degree of kinship one way or another.
240.
Mimosa eriorrhachis Bameby, sp. nov., inter M. albolanatametM. cryptothamnum quasi intermedia, a priori foliis paucis omnibus radicalibus capitulisque brevissime pedunculatis, a secunda caulibus ex ipso xylopodio, nec e truncis lignosis humifusis orientibus bracteisque floralibus elongatis (4-6 nec 2-2.5 mm longis) diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: pres du rio Tocantins, Glaziou 21101.—Holotypus, P (2 sheets); isotypi, +B (labelled "entre Jatobasinho et Lajedo [D. F.]") = F Neg. 1410, K = NY Neg. 11658.—M. eriostachys (sphalm.) Harms ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 185.
1906, nom. nud. Unarmed subshrubs from knotty xylopodium with few ample lvs forming a subradical tuft, the leafless wandlike inflorescence erect, simple or 2-3-branched, (3-)4-10 dm, bearing a long succession of well-separated, mostly sessile or subsessile subglobose capitula, the lf-axes and whole inflorescence densely silky-pilose with flagelliform setae to 2-6 mm, those of lf-stks relatively short incurved-ascending, those of inflorescence extremely long fine silky and lustrous, variably spreading and entangled, the firm lustrous lfts glabrous facially, minutely villosulousand setulose-ciliolate.
Stipules very firm, ovate-acuminate or lanceolate 6-14 x 2-6 mm, those subtending capitula deciduous before anthesis, all densely flagelliform-setose extemally, glabrous castaneous within.
Leaf stalks (1.3-) 1.8-3.5 dm, the petiole 15-40 x 1.2-2.3 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 7-20 mm; no interpinnal spicules; pinnae 12-25-jug., decrescent proximally but otherwise subequilong, the rachis of longer ones 3.5-7 cm, the small proximal pair of lfts contiguous to pulvinus (no paraphyUidia), the longer interfoliolar segments 1-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 25-40-jug., in outline Unear-oblong obtuse or apiculate, the longer ones 4.5- 7.5(-8.5) X 1-1.6 mm, aU veinless above, obtusely 3-nerved beneath, the costa subcentric.
Capitula solitary or 2-3 per node, all sessile or some proximal ones on peduncle to 1.5 cm, aU prior to anthesis conelike, without filaments 11- 14 mm diam.; bracts narrowly elliptic-oblanceolate 4-6 X 0.8-1.2 mm, in texture resembling stipules, densely setose dorsally; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate and a little smaller than the rest; calyx membranous, the extemally glabrous turbinate tube 0.6-1.5 mm, its orifice fringed with sometimes minutely gland-tipped setae to 2-2.5 mm; corolla 4.5-5.5 mm, its narrowly funnelform tube glabrous, the membranous ovate lobes 1.4-1.7 x 1-1.3 mm, a little thickened apically and very densely setose-barbate dorsally; filaments lilac-pink, monadelphous through 0.5-0.9 mm, exserted 11-17 mm.
Pods (described from weathered specimens persistent on annotinous stem) several per capitulum, sessile, in profile ± 17-23 x 10 mm and ± 5 mm thick, shortly bluntly apiculate, the replum 2-3 mm wide, the thick-textured valves separating entire from replum, this and the valves densely appressed-setose overall, the setae less than 0.2 mm diam. at base, with silky flageUiform tip; seeds not seen.
In cerrado and campo limpo, 850-1200 m, very local on Sa.
Geral do Parana within a radius of ±10 km of S. Joao da Alian9a in s.-e. Goias (near ITS), BrazU.-R. II-IV. The sibling species M. eriorrhachis and M. cryptothamnos represent collectively the culmination in a series of increasingly specialized campo life-forms leading from the distinctly shrubby habit of M. claussenii, with leaves scattered along the stems of the season, through the relatively undifferentiated M. albolanata, with leafy stems going out into a virgate pseudoraceme efoliate at anthesis (but leafy afterward), to an erect, permanently efoliate wand rising from a rosette of very large radical or subradical leaves.
Closely similar in habit, M. eriorrhachis and M. cryptothamnos differ in several correlated characters, as given in the foregoing diagnosis and repeated in discussion of the next.
The small vicariant ranges of the two species coincide neatly with those of Chamaecrista conferta vars. simulans and machrisiana (cf. Irwin & Bameby, Mem. New York Bot. Gard. 30: 196, 1977).
241.
Mimosa cryptothamnos Bameby, sp. nov., notulis multis vicinam M. eriorrhachin simulans, sed caulibus virgatis e rami validi humifusi 1-3 dm longi apice (nec ex ipso xylopodio) ortis, petiolis longioribus 3-9 (nec 1.5-4) cm longis, foliolis pauUo majoribus 7-9 x 1.7- 2.2 (nec 4.5-7.5 x 1-1.6) mm usque metientibus, capituUs minoribus absque filamentis ±10 (nec 11-14) mm diametro omnibus pedunculatis (nec praesertim sessilibus), necnon bracteis brevissimis 2-2.5 x 0.5 (nec 4-6 x 0.8-1.2) mm coroUae suae dimidio brevioribus (nec subaequilongis) certe diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: ±20 km s. of Alto Paraiso in Chapada dos Veadeiros, 1000 m, 20.
III.1969 (fr), Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 2^67^.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, MBM, NY, P, R, S, US.-Chapada dos Veadeiros, 21.
XII. 1968 (fl), Graziela Barroso (with M. Jose & Ana) 554.-Paratypi, NY, UB.
Terrestrial unarmed shrubs with few stout humifuse woody branches to 1-3 dm and 1-1.7 cm diam., each bearing at tip a cluster of 3-4 ample erect multifoliolate lvs and a stiff virgate leafless (rarely at first node 1 -Ivd) pseudoraceme 4-7 mm diam. at base and attaining 7.5-12 dm in height, the cauline and foliar axes densely clothed in basally thickened and lutescent, flagelliform gray-tipped setae to ± 2-4 mm, the firm lustrous brown-olivaceous lfts glabrous facially, pectinately setuloseand minutely villous-ciliolate.
Stipules associated with developed lvs firm ovate-triangular 7-13 x 2.5-6 mm, densely setose dorsally, glabrous chocolate-brown within, deciduous, those at leafless nodes or subtending peduncles caducous before anthesis.
Leaf-stalks (10-)24-43 cm, the shallowly widely sulcate petiole 3-9 cm, at middle 2 ^ mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 10-21 (-26) mm; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae (9-) 13-21 -jug.,
notably decrescent proximally, slightly so distally, the rachis of longer ones 5-11 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 34-48-jug., the first pair close to pulvinus, all in outline narrowly oblong obtuse, straight or almost so, the larger ones 7-9 x 1.7-2.2 mm, the faint venation obscurely elevated on both faces or only beneath.
Peduncles solitary or 2-3 per node, at anthesis 1.5-2(-?) cm, in fruit widely ascending 2-4 cm; capitula globose or squatly ellipsoid, without filaments ± 1 cm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-spatulate ±2- 2.5 X 0.5 mm, much shorter than the associated Rower;flowers4-merous 8-androus, some proximal ones staminate; calyx campanulate 0.35- 0.5 mm glabrous, its rim charged with setae up to 0.5-1.5 mm; corolla 4.5-5 mm, the funnelform tube glabrous, the concave, apically callous, extemally densely setulose lobes 1.2-1.8 mm; filaments pirUc, monadelphous through ±0.8 mm, exserted 9-10 mm.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) ± 1- 5 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong-elUptic to 25 X 11 mm, 2-4-seeded, the replum ±1.5 mm wide, the fleshy-leathery valves and replum alike densely coated with coarse comma-shaped, appressed and subcontiguous yellowish setulae; dehiscence not seen, but the valves probably falling entire from replum.—Frontispiece (A-C).
On rocky campo slopes at ± 1000 m, rare and local, known only from the s. end of Chapada dos Veadeiros, near 14°20'S, in e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-H. XII-II. Mimosa cryptothamnos is closely related to M. eriorrhachis, vicariant immediately southward on Sa.
Geral do Parana, but is distinguished by stout woody humifuse tmnks, longer tme petioles, slightly longer and wider leaflets, smaller, long-pedunculate capitula, and especially by smaU floral bracts, greatly surpassed by the associated flower.
In M. eriorrhachis each bract is as long as its flower and covers it in bud, so that the capitulum prior to anthesis is conelike, not moriform as in M. cryptothamnos.
The very long and dense comose indumentum of M. eriorrhachis is visually arresting but basically of the same type as in M. cryptothamnos, a little exaggerated in length and density.
242.
Mimosa claussenii Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 405.
1842.—Typus infra sub var. claussenii indicatur.
Coarse unarmed, amply leafy, potentiaUy arborescent shrubs commoiUy 1-2.5 m, but at times appearing herbaceous when regenerating from fire, and sometimes tmly (or seemingly) acaulescent or with new stems from procumbent branches, exceptionally attaining 3-4 or even 6 m with tmnk attaining 5-10 cm diam., the hornotinous branches usually 8-15 mm diam. and like the axes of lvs and inflorescence densely setose with basaUy dilated and either incurvedascending, erect or retrorse, distally tapering of flageUiform stramineous setae to (2.5-)3-10 mm long and at base to (0.2-)0.3-l .2 mm diam. mixed or not with minute villi but only very exceptionally with gland-tipped setulae (the lfts then glandular-ciliolate), the inflorescence a terminal, simple or weakly paniculate-branched pseudoraceme commonly less than 2 dm but exceptionally to 10 dm of globose or ellipsoid capitula subtended by hysteranthous lvs, these rapidly expanding at late anthesis or shortly thereafter and much surpassing the fruits, the multijugate lfts setoseor setuloseand sometimes in addition finely villosulous-ciliolate, glabrous on both faces or sometimes remotely puberulent on either, the pulvinules nearly always densely gray-villosulous.
Stipules lanceolate or triangular-acuminate (5-)6-18 X (1.5-)2-5 mm, the coriaceous blade densely setose dorsally, glabrous castaneous within, deciduous or rarely subpersistent.
Leaf-stalks of fully expanded lvs commonly 15- 36 cm, rarely only (6-)9-18 cm or to 60 cm, the stout petiole including obese hard pulvinus (1-)2- 7(-9) cm X (1.7-)2.2-5 mm, the longer interpinnal segments mostly to 0.8-1.5 cm or when relatively few to 2.5-4 cm, the ventral groove continuous between pinna-pairs (spicules 0); pinnae commonly (8-)10-22-, locally to 24-30(-37)- jug., decrescent proximally, less or not so distally, the rachis of longer ones (3-)4-l 5(-l 7) cm, the longer interfoUolar segments (1-) 1.4-3.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (25-)30-55(-62)-jug., the first pair close to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all in outline Unear-oblong obtuse apiculate, straight or slightly incurved distally, the longest (5.5-)7- 13(-15) X (1.2-)1.5-2.5(-2.8) mm, in var. microphyllidia 3-6 X 0.6-1.2 mm, the blades veinless or almost so above, beneath weakly obtusely 3-5-nerved from pulvinule.
Peduncles either solitary or 2-3 per node of inflorescence (2.5-)3- 15(-20) cm; capitula without filaments (11-)13- 21, rarely 20-25 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike or comose, the densely villous floral axis becoming l-3.5(-7) cm; bracts commonly oblanceolate,elliptic-oblanceolate or spatulate (3-)3.5-7.5, exceptionally to 12-15 mm, either longer or a little shorter than the subtended fl, in either case densely setose dorsally from base upward; flowers mostly 4-merous, the lower ones sometimes staminate and 5-merous, all diplostemonous; calyx-tube membranous 0.4-0.7(-1.2) mm, glabrous extemally beyond the sometimes setulose pedicel, the irregularly crenate-lobulate rim ciliate with simple setae to (0.5-)0.6-2. l(-2.5) or exceptionally only 0.3-0.4 mm; corollas either subhomomorphic or the lowest ones shorter and proportionately broader than the distal bisexual ones, the longer 4-8 (in vars. claviceps and dolichopoda to 9-10) mm, these narrowly cylindricvase-shaped, the ovate lobes 1.6-4 mm, always setulose or setulose-barbate dorsally; filaments united below the ovary into a stemonozone 1 mm or less, pink or lilac fading whitish, the longer ones exserted (10-) 13-27 mm.
Pods usually several (3-14) per capitulum, sessile, plumply compressed-ellipsoid or oblong-ellipsoid, in profile 2.5-5 X 1.4-2 (locally only 1-1.4) cm, bluntly or obscurely apiculate, the replum (disregarding vesture) 1.5-3.5(-4.5) mm wide, the low-convex valves consisting of livid exocarp at least 0.3- 1.7 mm and toward outer margins sometimes to 2.1 mm thick and of cmstaceous endocarp 0.1- 0.25 mm thick, when ripe separating entire from replum, the pod overall concealed by a dense coat of stout erect, distally incurved-ascending stramineous setae to (2-)3-5(-7) mm; seeds (poorly known) 7-14, often irregularly 2-seriate, ±4.3-5.6 mm, the testa castaneous lustrous.
As defined by the description, M. claussenii is a multiracial complex of which the detailed structure requires close investigation in the field.
The classification that follows is more exploratory than definitive.
Key to varieties of M. claussenii 1.
Capitula globose or plumply ellipsoid, without filaments 15-30 x (12-)15-24 mm, mostly 1-1.5 times as long as diam.; fls subhomomorphic in external form though the lowest often staminate only.
2.
Setae of stems and lf-stks retrorsely down-swept; rachis of longer pinnae 7 cm and more and longer lfts at least 7 mm 242a. var. claussenii (p. 399).
2.
Setae of stems and lf-stks proximally subvertical, thence antrorsely ascending.
3.
Subshrubs, shrubs and treelets, including inflorescence (7-)10-40(-60) dm tall; widespread over highland centr. and s. Goias, w. Minas Gerais and Distrito Federal. l^^l] BARNEBY: SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 399 4.
Pinnae of longer lvs (9-)10-22-jug. and bisexual corollas 4-5.5(-6) mm; lfts of longer pinnae more than 7 mm; common in range just given 242b. var. prorsiseta (p. 399).
4.
Pinnae of longer lvs over 22-jug., or bisexual corollas 6-8 mm, or both; lfts variable in size; of localized dispersal in e.-centr. Goias and Distrito Federal.
5.
Pachycaul treelets 3.5-4 m of Chapada dos Veadeiros; setae on valves of pod extremely coarse, the longer ones to 4.5-6 mm long from base 0.6-0.8 mm diam 242c. var. corneiseta (p. 401).
5.
Not arborescent, either stiff but slender shmbs or subshrubs from woody base, attaining 1-1.5 m; setae on valves of pod (so far as known) to 3-4 mm from base 0.25-0.4 mm diam. 6.
Inflorescence at anthesis compactly subcorymbose, its primary axis and branches less than 1 dm, not projected above foliage; Sa. do Morcego in extreme e. Goias 242d. var. vespertilionis (p. 401).
6.
Inflorescence at full anthesis laxly pseudoracemose, the primary axis extended and mostly well over 2 dm; allopatric.
7.
Sessile trunkless subshmbs, the lvs and almost leafless inflorescence subradical; longer lf-stks 2.5-6 dm, the rachis of longer pinnae 7-14 cm and longer lfts 7-10 mm; inflorescence an amply branched pyramidal panicle of pseudoracemes, the peduncles mostly 1.5-6(-8) cm; near Cavalcante in n. Chapada dos Veadeiros. .. 242e. var. megistophylla (p. 401).
7.
Shrubs with extended trunk or extended leafy cauline axis, or both.
8.
Virgate shrubs with extended leafy cauline axis; lf-stks 20-34 cm and longer lfts 3-6 mm; inflorescence a simple terminal pseudoraceme; Sa.
Geral near S. Joao da Alian9a and local in Distrito Federal; fl. II-IV 242g. var. microphyllidia (p. 402).
8.
Diffuse shrubs with prostrate trunk and tufts of lvs altemating with extended inflorescence-axis; lf-stks 30-50 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 7-10.5 cm and longer lfts 5.5-9 mm; inflorescence branched candelabrijform; Distrito Federal only; fl. VII-IX 242f var. soderstromii (p. 401).
3.
Dwarf subsessile subshrubs with terrestrial caudex or short stout trunk, including axis of subcorymbose inflorescence only 2.5-4 dm tall; local on upper Tocantins near Niquelandia, centr. Goias 242h. var. pumila (p. 402).
1.
Capitula massively oblong-ellipsoid, without filaments 40-80 x 22-27 mm, ±1.5-3 times as long as diam.; fls strongly dimorphic, the proximal staminate ones at once shorter and proportionately broader than distal bisexual ones; peduncles 1-2 dm.
9.
Lf-formula of longer lvs ±xxx/25; the rachis of longer pinnae 3-5.5 cm; Chapada dos Veadeiros, e.-centr. Goias 242i. var. claviceps (p. 403).
9.
Lf-formula of longer lvs ±xx-xxiii/50-60; the rachis of longer pinnae 12-17 cm; s.-centr. Goias just w. of D. F 242j. var. dolichopoda (p. 403).
242a. Mimosa claussenii Bentham var. claussoid; floral bracts 4-9, exceptionally 12-15 mm; senii.
M. claussenii Bentham, 1842, I.e., sen. corollas subuniform 5-7.5(-9) mm. str.—"Minas Geraes, Claussen; Brazil, Pohl."
On red sandy, arenitic or rarely calcareous soils Lectotypus, Claussen 19, K! = NYNeg.
7975; in cerrado climax, 700-1240 m, common and isotypus, G!; syntypi, Pohl d.l411 = 1216,¥J. locaUy plentiful on the Tocantins-Paranaiba-Sao NY! W! Francisco (Paracatu) watershed in e.-centr. and s.-e. Goias, adj. Minas Gerais, and Distrito FedeM. formosissima Taubert ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. j-^l, from Chapada dos Veadeiros s.-w. to Sa. dos France 53(Mem. 3b): 184.
1906, nom nud -"Entre pireneus and s. to Sas. dos Cristais and da TiUhonoetCiganos, Goyaz, [Glaziou] 21092. —Spe- .
. ^^ A/T -^A cimina authem.
G! K! P! S! n n c a . - R . (XI-)XII-IV(-V).
Map 34.
The type-locaUty of M. claussenii is unknown.
Flowering when l^(-6) m tall, arborescent Some specimens collected by Claussen are laonly in protected places where immune to fire; beUed "Cachoeira do Campo," but we have no setae of homotinous stems deflexed, the longer evidence of the species occurring east of rio S. ones 4-11(-14) mm, at base 0.5-1,2(-l.5) mm Francisco in modem times, diam.; leaf-formula (ix-)xi-xxiv(-xxix)/(30-)34- 50(-55), the longer pinnae 7-15 cm and longer 242b. Mimosa claussenii Bentham var. prorsiIfts 7-13 mm; capitula globose or plumply ellipseta Bameby, var. nov., cum var. claussenii 20« MIMOSA CLAUSSENII (in part - other vars are locally endemic within the main range of the species) var. CLAUSSENII # var. CORNEISETA Q var. PRORSISETA© l e t SMkn 28" MAP 34.
Planaltine Brazil.
Range of some varieties of M claussenii Bentham. omnino congrua nisi caulium et petiolomm setis prorsus incurvo-incumbentibus (nec reflexis) absimilis.—Brazil.
Goias: cerrado, 1100 m, ±20 km n. of Cristalina, 7.
III.1966 (fl), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 13682.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, MBM, NY, P, R, US. Essentially like var. claussenii, occurring in similar habitats but in discrete uniform populations, differing in antrorsely incurved-ascending setae of stems and lf-stks, the longer ones 3- 5 mm long and 0.4-0.8 mm diam. at bulbous base.
Scattered within the range of var. claussenii but more local, especially frequent on and near Sas. dos Pireneus and dos Cristais in s. Goias, occasional in Distrito Federal and in w.-centr. Minas Gerais.-Fl.
XII-V. Map 34.
By definition var. prorsiseta is weakly defined, but is easily recognized and apparently stabilized in extensive populations.
Its status requires further field-study.
242c. Mimosa claussenii Bentham var. corneiseta Bameby, var. nov., a var. prorsiseta, cum qua pube caulium petiolique communis antrorsus arcuata congmit, imprimis pinnis magis numerosis 15-36 (nec 9-22)-jugis usque necnon statura arborescenti pachycauli diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: 8 km w. of Veadeiros, 22.x. 1965 (fr), Irwin (with Souza & Reis dos Santos) 9476. —Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, MBM, NY, P, R, S, US. Pachycaul treelets 3.5-4 m with tmnk to 8-10 cm diam., the lf-stks hispid with forwardly ascending flagelliform setae to 3-6 mm long and 0.3-0.4(-0.5) mm diam. at bulbous base; leafformula xv-xxx(-xxxvi)/30-50, the rachis of longer pinnae 5-10 cm, the longer lfts (3.5-)6-8.5(-9) mm; peduncles 3-9 cm; capitula without filaments 11-13, rarely 20 mm diam.; bisexual corollas 6-8.5 mm; pods in profile 25-40 x 12-17 mm, the valves densely setose with contiguous, basally erect then forwardly curved setae of different calibers, the stouter hornlike ones to 4.5- 6 mm long, at base 0.6-0.8 mm diam. In cerrado near outcrops, 1000-1250 m, known only from Chapada dos Veadeiros between Alto Paraiso and Cavalcante, near 14°S in e.-centr. Goias.-n. III-IV(-?).
Map 34.
242d. Mimosa claussenii Bentham var. vespertilionis Bameby, var. nov., a var. corneiseta habitu fruticoso mediocri (nec arborescenti), a var. prorsiseta pinnis 22-28 (nec 9-20)-jugis usque, foliolis 5.5-6.5 (nec 7+) mm usque longis, coroUis bisexualibus 7-8 (nec 4-6) mm usque longis, ab ambabus pinnamm majomm rachis 3.5-5.5 (nec 5.5-12) cm usque longo diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Sa. do Morcego, 50 km n.-e. of Formosa, 23.
IV. 1966 (fl), Irwin (with Souza, Reis dos Santos & Grear) 15284. — Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, P, NY, R, S, US. Shrubs ± 1.5 m, the stems and lf-stks strigose with narrowly ascending bulbous-based setae to 1-2 mm, the inflorescence silky-setose with more slender setae to 3-5 mm; leaf-formula xx-xxviii/ 40-50, the longer lf-stks 16-23 cm, the longer pinnae 3.5-5.5 cm, the longer lfts 5.5-6.5 x l mm; capitula globose, without filaments ± 14 mm diam.; bisexual corollas 7-8 mm; pods 25-35 x 15 mm, the setae on valves contiguous ±3-4 mm.
In cerrado near 800 m, known only from Sa. do Morcego on the Parana-Sao Francisco watershed near 14°30'S in e.-centr. Goias.—Fl.
IVV(-?).
The var. vespertilionis has nearly the leaf-formula of var. corneiseta, but shorter, more condensed pinnae and narrower leaflets; it is a shrub, not pachycaulous.
It differs from sympatric M. foliolosa var. paranani in longer leaf-stalks, more crowded pinnae (3.5-6, not 7-12 mm apart), much longer peduncles (4.5-7, not 1.5-3.5 cm), and longer bisexual flowers (7-8, not 5-6.5 mm long).
242e. Mimosa claussenii Bentham var. megistophylla Bameby, var. nov., habitu singulari eximia, caule valido basin versus ampliter paucifolio deinde in paniculam ramosam pyramidalem aphyllam abeunte, toto metrali usque, inter omnes M. claussenii varietates primo intuitu recognita.—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros ±10 km s. of Cavalcante, 8.
III.1969 (fl), Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 2^07i.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Functionally herbaceous from woody rootstock, the erect stem ±1-1.5 cm diam. at base, bearing exceptionally long lvs at first 3-5 nodes, thence passing into an amply branched pyramidal efoliate (or randomly few-lvd) multicapitulate panicle of pseudoracemes, the central axis to 1 m, the lateral ones ±3-4 dm, the axes of stem, lvs and panicle hispid with spreading-incurved setae to 3-6.5 mm; leaf-formula xviixxxii/45-62, the lf-stks 2.5-6 dm, the rachis of longer pinnae 7-14 cm, the longer lfts 7-10 x 1.4-1.8 mm; capitula without filaments 11-16 mm diam., the bisexual corollas 4-6 mm; pod not seen.
In cerrado near 700-1100 m, known only from n. Chapada dos Veadeiros near Cavalcante, close to 13°50'S in e.-centr. Goias.-R. II-III. While strangely modified in habit and proportion of subradical foUage to ample efoliate panicle, var. megistophylla has essentially the leaves and flowers of var. prorsiseta.
242f. Mimosa claussenii Bentham var. soderstromii Bameby, var. nov., habitu inter varietates affiniores praestans: inflorescentiae candelabriformis e trunco humifuso ortae axes ad anthesin aphylli postea ultra flores foliigeri, folia cum inflorescentia vemali (mensibus julsep) coetanea pauca conferta maxima; flores necnon leguminis magni forma vix a var. c/<2W55^«z/divergent.—Brazil.
Distrito Federal: ±35 km e. of BrasUia, dry slopes in cerrado, 700-1000 m, 21.
VIII.1964 (fl, fr), Irwin & Soderstrom 5^05.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Diffiise shrubs attaining a spread of 2 m but a height of only 4-6 dm, the humifuse tmnks to 2.5 cm diam. giving rise to a few long, amply multipinnate subradical lvs and stout ascending flowering stems 1.5—4 dm, these leafless or almost so at anthesis but terminating in a tuft of hysteranthous foliage, the Ifand inflorescenceaxes both hirsute and viscid-villosulous, the inflorescence a simple or few-branched pseudoraceme of large long-pedunculate subglobose capitula; leaf-formula (xxi-)xxiii-xxx/50-64, the lf-stks (2-)3-5 dm, the rachis of longer pinnae 7-10.5 cm, the longer lfts 5.5-9 x 1.2-2 mm; peduncles 7-15 cm; capitula without filaments 15-20 mm diam.; corolla (5.5-)6-8 mm; pods 3 0 ^ 7 X 16-18 mm, the replum 3-4.5 mm wide, the valves concealed by a coat of lustrous creamcolored setae to 3 ^ mm.
Hillsides in cerrado, probably near 1000 m, locally common but known only from Distrito Federal at points 35 km e. and 20 km n.-e. of BrasUia.-H. VII-IX. The var. soderstromii has the capitula and pods of var. claussenii but is distinguished by peculiar growth-form described above, a partly glandular indumentum, and a modified rhythm of growth.
At anthesis, which occurs in July and August, a few very large mature subradical leaves, apparently of the previous year's growth, persist at tip of some annotinous branches, while from the tip of others arise short stout leafless axes bearing a succession of long-pedunculate and relatively large capitula.
Subsequently this flowering axis bears beyond the flowers a tuft of hysteranthous leaves of which I have seen no example fuUy grown out.
The growth-cycle deserves careful observation in the field.
I dedicate this odd but handsome mimosa to the late Dr. Thomas Soderstrom, agrostologist at the Smithsonian Institution, who accompanied Dr. Irwin in 1964.
242g. Mimosa claussenii Bentham var. microphyllidia Bameby, var. nov., var. prorsisetae proxima, sed foliolis minoribus 3-6 (nec 7+) mm diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: 7 km by road n. of S. Joao da Alian9a, 25.
III.1973 (fl), W. R. Anderson 79J7.—Holotypus, UB; isotypus, NY. [M. rheiptera var. kaliniaeBamehy, nom. nud. in sched.] Virgately erect shrubs 1.5-3 m with proportionately long narrow lvs and lax far-exserted, hysteranthously foUate pseudoracemes, the stems, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence hispid-pilose with plain setae to 2.5—4.5 mm and 0.2-0.5 mm diam. at base and sometimes minutely glandular-setulose; leaf-formula xx-xxix/33-52, the longer lfstks 11-32 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 4-8 cm, the longer lfts 3-6 x 0.6-1.2 mm; peduncles (3-)5-11.5 cm; capitula without filaments (10-) 12-15 mm diam.; bisexual corollas 5-7 mm; pods (little known) of var. claussenii.
In cerrado, often at foot of outcrops, 1000- 1400 m, local on Chapada dos Veadeiros and Sa.
Geral do Parana in lat. 13°45'-14°35'S, in e.- centr. Goias, and known from one collection (20 km n.-e. of Brasilia) in Distrito Federal.—Fl.
IIIV.
The var. microphyllidia is very close to var. prorsiseta but different in small crowded leaflets and consequently narrow outline of leaves and pinnae.
242h. Mimosa claussenii Bentham var. pumila Bameby, var. nov., caulibus nanis 2.5-4 dm longis e caudice ligneo ortis praestans, foliorum formula a var. claussenii vix diversa.— Brazil.
Goias: 15 km s. of Niquelandia, gravelly hills in cerrado, 1000 m, 21.1.1972 (fl), Irwin (with Anderson, Stieber & Lee) 34614. — Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, P, NY, R, S, US. Dwarf, amply leafy subshrubs 2.5-4 dm tall with gnarled woody caudex-branches to 1 cm diam. and axis of homotinous stem together with that of subcorymbose pseudoraceme 1.5 dm, pubescent like var. prorsiseta; leaf-formula viii-xii/ 28-45, the rachis of longer pinnae 3-8(-10.5) cm, the longer lfts (5.5-)6.5-8 mm; peduncles 2.5-6 cm; capitula without filaments ±13 mm diam. Stony hillsides in cerrado, near 1000 m, known only from the type-locaUty at 14°30'S in s.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-Fl.
I-II(-?).
This ambiguous plant may be visualized as a dwarfed version of var. prorsiseta, in habit simulating M. albolanata var. paucipinna, but with the broad ellipsoid pod (20-30 x 14-15 mm) of M. claussenii sensu lato.
It was found in close association with the locally endemic and strongly characterized Chamaecrista burchellii (Benth.) Irwin & Bameby.
242i. Mimosa claussenii Bentham var. claviceps Bameby, var. nov., inter omnes speciei varietates foliis longissimis, pinnis multijugis abbreviatis paucifoUolatis 3-5.5 cm tantum longis (foliorum formula ±xxx/25), pedunculis elongatis 11-16 cm, capitulisque maximis absque filamentis 35-80 x 24 mm usque praestans; arbuscula brassicoidea, foliis ad ramorum apicem congestis, flosculis heteromorphis, imis parvis 5-meris, superioribus majoribus 4-meris.—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros ±6 km e. ofAlto Paraiso, 1500- 1700 m, 15.11.1979 (fl), M. S. G. Ferreira & F. Cardoso 57.-Holotypus, UB, on 2 sheets, one = NY Neg. 11826.
Macrophyllous rosette-tree ±3 m, densely hispid with coarse erect yellow-brown flagelliform setae to 2,5-6 mm long and 0.4-0.5 mm diam. at dilated base, eglandular, the long narrow lvs and elongate peduncles expanding synchronously, the extremely massive capitula oblong-ellipsoid; leaf-formula xxvii-xxxiii/25, the lf-stks 2- 3 dm, the rachis of longer pinnae ±3-5.5 cm, the longer lfts attaining 8.5 x 2 mm; peduncles 11-16 cm; capitula without filaments 35-80 x 24 mm; lower 5-merous corollas ±7 mm and upper 4-merous ones ±9 mm; filaments monadelphous through 1.5-2 mm, exserted 15-20 mm; pod unknown.
In thin cerrado or campo mpestre about sandstone outcrops, near 1600 m, known only from the type-locality on Chapada dos Veadeiros at 14°07'S in e.-centr. Goias.-R. II-III. This variety and the next following differ from the rest of M. claussenii in extremely massive, long-pedunculate ellipsoid capitula and in conspicuously dimorphic flowers; they should perhaps be treated collectively as a distinct species, but are too little known to be properly evaluated.
WhUe apparently simUar in growth-form, they differ from one another greatly in leaf-formula and consequently in gross appearance of detached branches.
242j. Mimosa claussenii Bentham var. dolichopoda Bameby, var. nov., a var. claussenii imprimis capituUs absque filamentis maximis ellipsoideis ±4-5 x 2.3-2.7 cm diversa, ulteriusflosculisdimorphis necnon legumine angustius oblongo ±2.5 x 1 cm singularis, a var. clavicipite, quoad capitula maxima comparabili, foliorum pinnis minus numerosis (±20-, nec ±30-jugis) subtriplo longioribus (12-17, nec 3-5.5 cm longis) foliolisque usque 50-60 (nec ±25)-jugis abstans.—Brazil.
Goias: dans la belle vaUee de Chico Costa [near 15°40'S, 48°10'W, close to w. boundary of Distrito Federal], sur les coUines, 1 O.X.I894 (fl, fr), A. F. M. Glaziou 2709i. -Holotypus, P = NY Neg. 11814; isotypi, ^B = F Neg. 1405, C! F! = F Neg. 54831, K! LE! M! S!-M. dolichopoda Harms ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 185.
1906, nom. nud. Of unknown stature but described by Glaziou in field-note as singulier vegetal a tige souvent simple, remarkable for great length of lvs and peduncles, the stems and lf-stks densely hispid with coarse, erect or subdeclinate, distally incurved setae to 10 mm long and at dilated base to 0.8 mm diam.; leaf-formula ±xx/50-60, the lf-stks ±3-4 dm, the rachis of longer pinnae 12- 17 cm, the longer lfts 13-15 x 2-2.5 mm; peduncles 12-20 cm; capitula without filaments 40- 45 X 23-27 mm, the bracts ±8 mm; lowery/ovvers staminate, the coroUa campanulate ±5.5 mm, the upper bisexual, the corolla subcylindric to 10 mm; pods narrowly oblong in profile ±3.5 x 1 cm, the replum ±1.5 mm wide, the valves hispid with crowded but not contiguous, erect bulbousbased setae up to 2.5-7 mm.
On hillsides, to be expected in campo cerrado near 1000 m, known only from the type-locality on the Maranhao-Descoberto divide in s.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-n. IX-X(-?).
See note under the preceding.
242bis.
Mimosa sp. [M. porphyrea Bameby in sched.,
nom. nud.]—BrazU.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros, 12 km n.-w. of Veadeiros on road to Cavalcante, 21 .X.
1965 (fr), Irwin (with Souza & Reis dos Santos) 9397, NY, UB, US. Habit of M. claussenii var. prorsiseta, but the lf-stk charged between each pinna-pair with a pronounced spicule and the pinnae relatively few; leaf-formula (vii-)viii-xi/32-50, the distal pair of pinnae (4.5-)5-10 cm, the longer lfts 7-8 x 2-2.4 mm; peduncles 5.5-6.5 cm; pods in profile 30-50 X 13-14 mm, the valves and replum densely hispid with erect, then forwardly curved rusty-golden setae to ±4 mm and a thin undercoat of minute villi and gland-tipped setulae.
This plant was found on a creek bank at 1200 m, fmiting in October.
The specimens have fmiting peduncles subtended by leaves which may be hysteranthous and shorter than those below the inflorescence.
The locality is in the range of M. longepedunculata, in which interpinnal spicules are frequent, but this is reported as a depressed subshmb not over 1 m tall, whereas Irwin 9397 is described by the collector as a few-branched shmb three meters in height.
Field observation is needed to establish the status and affinity of this puzzling plant.
243.
Mimosa gardneri Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 405.
1842.-BrazU, Pohl; Goyaz, Gardner, n. 2136."
, the data expanded and emended in Martius, R. bras. 15(2): 387.
1876: "in provincia Goyaz ad Serra da Natividade: Gardner 3136 .
.
. in eadem provincia ?: Po/z/."-Lectotypus, Gardner 3136, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 11660; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1387\ BM! G! K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 7970; syntypi, Pohl d.l469, K! NY! W! = M. albolanata var. paucipinna.
M. gardneri sensu Bentham, 1875:440, ex parte, quoad typum.
Habit not inferred from specimens available but described by Gardner as arborescent 2-2.6 m, the axis of extended efoliate, simple or fewbranched pseudoraceme hispid with spreading and then loosely incurved-ascending, basally bulbous (0.2-0.4 mm diam.), tapering yeUowish setae 3-6 mm, nowhere glandular, the firm brown sublustrous lfts faciaUy glabrous, thinly pilosulousand setose-ciliate.
Stipules firm, triangularacuminate ± 10 X 4-5 mm, glabrous castaneous within, caducous.
Leaf-stalks to 26-43 cm, the stout petiole including hard obese pulvinus ± 10 X 4-5 mm, the interpinnal segments 10-20 mm; no spicules or paraphyllidia; pinnae 20-25-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones becoming ±10-13 mm, the interfoliolar segments ±2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae to 55- 65-jug., scarcely graduated, the blades Unear-oblong from obtusangulate base, the longer ones 8- 10.5 X 1.5-2 mm, 4.5-6 times as long as wide, weakly 3-nerved.
Pseudoracemes including short common peduncle 2-3.5 dm; peduncles of capitula at anthesis 1-2.5 cm; capitula globose, without filaments 12-13 mm diam.; bracts narrowly oblanceolate 4-5 mm, densely setose dorsally from base upward; calyx-tube 0.3 mm, together with setiform cilia 2 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 5-6 mm, the extemaUy setulose lobes ± 2 x 1 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through nearly 1 mm, exserted 12 mm; pod unknown.
Habitat not recorded, to be expected in cerrado near 700 m or higher, known from the typecollection made by Gardner in December 1839 on Sa. da Natividade near 11°50'S and from one modem collection from Teresina de Goias near 13°30'S in centr. Goias, Brazil.-H. XII-? Mimosa gardneri is inconveniently intermediate between M. claussenii sensu lato and M. albolanata sensu lato, having the stature, the very long leaves and the relatively long leaflets of the former but the extended pseudoraceme and short individual peduncles of the latter.
The type-specimens, cut off at base of the simple or branched pseudoraceme, were taken, according to Gardner's label at Kew, from a small tree, a stature never attained or even approached, so far as known, by M. albolanata.
Serra da Natividade lies far to the north of any known population of M. albolanata, but much nearer to the also arborescent M. claussenii var. corneiseta at about 14°S on Chapada dos Veadeiros.
Until the stature of true M. gardneri can be confirmed and the pod made known, no evaluation of its relationships is possible.
I am obliged to accept it provisionally as a distinct species.
Bentham's concept of M. gardneri was based from the first on a mixture of the arborescent lectotype and suffmticose M. albolanata represented by Pohl d.l469.
His extended description in Flora brasiliensis introduced further elements of M. albolanata, of which he particularly noted the softer, more pliant setae.
The epithet gardneri has since been applied in herbaria to a variety of large-leaved Pachycarpae and the tme plant of Gardner has dropped out of sight.
The type-number Gardner 3136 was recorded 1991] B A R N E B Y : SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (MIMOSA) 405 by error in the protologue as 2136, a mistake corrected in Flora brasiliensis.
244.
Mimosa stylosa Bameby, sp. nov., affini M. claussenii et praecipue ejus var. prorsisetae simillima, ab hac (remote allopatrica) pedunculis brevibus 2-3 (nec 3-9) cm longo, stylo longissimo 24-28 mm longo stamina eximie (per 6-9 mm) superanti, necnon leguminis valvulis dissite breviusque setis e basi bulboso 0.5-0.6 mm diam. 1.5-2 mm tantum usque longis pellitis diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Sa. do Espinhago 23 km e. of Diamantina, 15.
III.1970 (fl + fr annot.), Irwin (with Fonseca, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 27555. —Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Shrubs 0.7-2 m with extremely ample multipinnate and multifoliolate lvs, the homotinous stems, lf-stks and axes of early elongating, hysteranthously foliate pseudoraceme ofplumply ellipsoid capitula hispid with fine flagelliform brownish setae to 3-5 mm long and at dilated base to 0.2-0.3 mm diam., those of the stems proximally retrorse, thence incurved-ascending, the lfts facially glabrous, setose-ciliolate.
Stipules firm, lance-acuminate 8-14 x 1.5-3 mm, glabrous castaneous within, readUy disjointing.
Leafstalks 15-33 cm, the petiole almost 0 or to 2- 3.5 cm, the longer interpiimal segments 8-20 mm; spicules 0; pinnae 20-28-jug., the rachis of longer ones (2.5-)3-8 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 35-63- jug., the first pair next to pulvinus, the blades Unear-oblong obtuse apiculate, the longer ones 5-7 X 0.9-1.5 mm.
Primary axis of pseudoraceme 2-4.5 dm; peduncles 1-3 per node, 2-3 cm; capitula without filaments 14-25 x 11-13 mm, prior to anthesis conelike and densely hispid; bracts oblanceolate 4-6 x 0.8-1.2 mm, coarsely setose dorsally, eglandular; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate; calyx 0.5- 0.7 mm, glabrous extemally, the chaffy cilia to 1-2 mm; bisexual coroUas 5-6 mm, the tube glabrous, the lobes dorsally setulose; filaments pink, monadelphous through 1-1.5 mm around base of pilosulous ovary, the longer ones exserted 11-16 mm; style 22-28 mm, surpassing the longer filaments by 5-9 mm.
Pods (described from annotinous sample) 1-several per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong-eUiptic 25-30 x 11-12 mm, the replum at broadest point 2.5-3.5 mm wide, distally contracted into a stout conic cusp 2 mm, the valves when ripe separating entire from replum, the livid exocarp to 0.4-0.5 mm and cmstaceous endocarp 0.1-0.15 mm thick in section, the replum and valves alike hispid with setae of different calibers separated by distinct though narrow interspaces, the coarser setae erectincurved to 1.5-2 mm long, at base 0.45-0.6 mm diam., those of replum a little shorter; ovules 5- 8; seeds not seen.
In cerrado near 900 m, known only from the type-locality on headwaters of rio Jequitinhonha e. of Diamantina and from Sa. do Cipo, between lat. 18°20' and 19°30'S in centr. Minas Gerais.- Fl.
III-IV, fr. persistent on dead stems into second year.
Mimosa stylosa is closely akin to M. claussenii, resembling its var. prorsiseta in habit and vesture and its var. corneiseta in leaf-formula and vesture but less so in habit.
It differs from M. claussenii sensu lato in shorter peduncles and vesture of the pod, of which the livid exocarp is visible between relatively short setae and not concealed by a long dense fleece.
Related species known to occur in Sa. do Espinha90 either have much shorter leaf-stalks, shorter pinnae, or both (M. foliolosa vars.) or, if the leaves are similar in size and formula (M. albolanata var.) they are bome on abbreviated stems arising from a subsessile terrestrial woody pediment.
None of these shares with M. stylosa the elongated style which projects 6-9 mm beyond the longer set of filaments.
The material from Sa. do Cipo (Joly & al. 1748, E) differs from that from near Diamantina in subobsolete tme petioles, somewhat shorter pinnae, and more fugacious stipules, but otherwise agrees well with the type.
Mimosa foliolosa var. pachycarpa, the mimosa of this series common and repeatedly collected on Sa. do Cipo, is readily distinguished from M. stylosa by fewer leaflets (to 20-26, not 35 or more pairs per pinna), and small capitula (without filaments 7-8, not 11-13 mm diam.).
245.
Mimosa rheiptera Bameby, sp. nov., inter turbas M. foliolosae et M. claussenii intermedia, primae pinnis abbreviatis, secundae statura arborescenti pedunculisque elongatis (5-8.5 cm longis) accedens, aM. claussenii var. microphyllidia pinnamm rachi 2.5-3.1 (nec 4- 8) cm usque longa vix diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros 38 km n. of S. Joao da Alian^a, 25.
IV. 1956 (fl), E. Yale Dawson 7^552.—Holotypus, NY; isotypus, RSA.
Trees attaining 4 m, with slender homotinous branches clad in proportionately long narrow multipinnate microphylUdious lvs, the axis of stem, lf-stks and peduncles pilose with weak ascending setae to ±1.5 mm mixed with scattered villi and many small orange gland-tipped setulae, the lfts glabrous facially or thinly setulose beneath, sparsely gland-cioliolate, the inflorescence an open pseudoraceme projected at anthesis ± 1 dm from expanded foliage but hysteranthously foliate.
Stipules firm ovate-acuminate ±4-5 x 2-3 mm, pubescent extemally like stem, glabrous castaneous within, deciduous before the associated If.
Leaf-stalks ±12-19 cm, the petiole reduced almost to an obese hard pulvinus, the longer interpinnal segments 5-7 mm; spicules 0; pinnae ±33-35-jug., markedly decrescent basipetally from near mid-lf, slightly so distally, the rachis of longer ones 25-31 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.6-0.9 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 29-33-jug., the first pair next to pulvinus, the blades oblong obtuse, the largest 2.5-3.5 x 0.7-0.9 mm, all becoming 3-nerved beneath.
Peduncles solitary and paired 5-8 cm; capitula subglobose, without filaments 13-14 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts spatulate-oblanceolate ±4.5 mm, beyond middle densely setose and glandular-setulose dorsally; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the staminate lower ones a little shorter than the rest; calyx-tube 0.6 mm glabrous, the undulate rim with a few plain or capitellate setulae 0.2-0.3 mm; bisexual corollas 5-6 mm, the lobes ± 1 mm, sUvery-setulose dorsally; filaments pink, exserted to 17 mm; pod unknown.
In "grassland at edge of cerrado" and in gallery margin, 700-1000 m, known only from the municipios of Veadeiros and Cavalcante near 14°S in e.-centr. Goias.-R. IV-V(-?).
This elegant but troublesome mimosa appears very closely related to M. claussenii var. microphyllidia, with which it shares slender arborescent stature and extended, hysteranthously foliate inflorescence; but its extremely short pinnae and tiny leaflets are more suggestive of M. foliolosa sensu lato.
Ifreferred either to M. claussenii or to M. foliolosa, it breaks down the already fragile distinction between these two already unwieldy complexes.
Although I suspect that M. rheiptera represents an extreme microphyllidious expression of the M. claussenii line, I describe it as an independent species for taxonomic convenience.
If the pod tums out to be that of M. claussenii, the status of M rheiptera will need reassessment.
In general habit of growth M. rheiptera resembles M. struthionoptera, but the latter stands well apart, nevertheless, in dense velvety-villosulous indumentum, longer narrower stipules, and fewer pinnae accommodating to 45-50 (not ±30) pairs of leaflets.
The wholly eglandular M. densa differs yet further in having leaves and compact inflorescence crowded at tip of decorticate branches and in smaller flowers with filaments hardly half as long. 246.
Mimosa struthionoptera Bameby, sp. nov., e grege Pachycarparum foliolis minutis confertissimis ac valde numerosis notatamm his signis eminens: pubes e villis densis nitidis setulisque subaequilongis glandula luteola coronatis intermixtis ±0.3-0.5 mm longis setisque eglandulosis raris rufescentibus 1-1.5 mm longis constans; foliomm axis primarius elongatus 9-12 cm longus, spiculis destitutus; pinnae 22-24-jugae; foliola arete imbricata pinnamm majomm 50-58-juga; pseudoracemus breviter exsertus; coroUae 5-6 mm longae bracteam subaequantis lobi extus setulosi.
Statura arborescenti habituque cum M. densae varietatibus fere quadrat sed pubes pinnaeque simul longiores (4-5, nec 2.5-3.3 cm usque) ac minus numerosae (±23-, nec 35-jugae) eximie differunt.—Brazil.
Goias: Morro das Antas entre a Sede do Parque Nacional do Tocantins e Veadeiros, 26.
IX.1967 (fl), de Haas Sr., J. H. de Haas & R. P. Belem 376 in hb. Brade.
50^59.-Holotypus, BRADE; isotypus, NY.
Amply leafy unarmed tree 4 m, of unknown girth, the stout, densely leafy hornotinous branches together with short exserted pseudoraceme of plumply ovoid capitula to 3-3.5 dm, the stems and foliage densely softly gray-villous and viscidulous with erect silvery hairs and yellowish pin-glands ±0.3-0.5 mm intermixed with random (beneath capitula crowded) fine plain rufescent setae to 1-1.5 mm, the lfts viUosulous on both faces, glandular-ciliolate.
Stipules (early dry caducous, consequently little known) lance-acuminate 9-12 X 1-1.5 mm, the firm blades glabrous castaneous within.
Leaf-stalks ascending at narrow angles to the stem, 11-17 cm, the petiole including (or largely composed of) obese gray-velutinous pulvinus 9-12 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-7 mm, the ventral groove continuous between pinna-pairs (spicules 0); pinnae 22-24-jug., strongly decrescent proximally but scarcely so distally, the rachis of longer ones 4.5-5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.7-1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 50-58-jug., the first pair not more than 0.3 mm distant from minute villosulous paraphyllidia, all narrowly oblong obtuse, the larger ones ±4-4.5 x 1 mm, the blades veinless above, faintly 3-nerved beneath.
Peduncles solitary and geminate 4-5 cm; capitula without filaments ±20 x 14 mm, prior to anthesis loosely conelike; bracts linear-oblanceolate 5-6 mm, both setulose and glandular dorsally, surpassing the flower until full anthesis; flower with calyx shallowly campanulate ±0.4 mm, the orifice ciliolate with weak, sometimes gland-tipped setulae to ±0.8 mm; corolla 5-6 mm, the slenderly funnelform tube extemally glabrous, the ovate concave, apically callous and dorsally densely setulose lobes ± 1 mm; filaments pale pink, monadelphous through ± 1 mm, exserted to 11 mm; pod unknown.
On rocky slopes at or perhaps above 1200 m, known only from the type-locality on the Tocantins slope of Chapada dos Veadeiros, near 14°S in e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-R. IX-X(-?).
Short soft, partly glandular—and on leaf-pulvini extremely dense and plush-like—indumentum of the foliage, extended (not rosette-forming) annual branches, relatively long crowded pinnae and tiny imbricate leaflets characterize this visuaUy striking arborescent mimosa.
In habit it closely resembles M. rheiptera, which differs in predominantly yellow-setose pubescence and longer peduncles.
Field observation of growthforms and dispersal on and between rock-piles in Tocantins National Park are required before the classification of these and related forms can be worked out.
The epithet refers to the leaves, fancifully likened to ostrich plumes.
247.
Mimosa longepedunculata Taubert, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 21: 432.
1896.-"Habitat in valle fluvii Passa Tempo in ditione Maranhao superioris: ULE n. 2830—Flor. et fmct. m. Sept. [1892]."-Holotypus, +B; isotypi, HBG! P (Ule 7 in hb. Glaziov.)! M. tocantina Taubert, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 21:431.1896. — "Habitat in ditione Tocantini superioris in montosis ad Vargem grande: ULE n. 2826.—Ror. m. Sept. [1892]."-Holotypus, +B; isotypi, HBG! P (Ule 3 in hb. Glaziov.,
"nos morros da regiao do Tocantins superior, Pizarao [=ribeirao Pizarao, 14°10'S, 47*'35'W]")! = NY Neg. 11812.
Amply leafy unarmed procumbent shrubs forming matted growths to l-2(-3) m diam. but only 2-4(-5) dm tall, the castaneous stems, lfaxes and peduncles hispid with subhorizontal, distally incurved tapering or flagelliform setae to (1.5-)2-5(-7) mm and the ventral face of lf-axes and the elongate axillary peduncles in addition finely villosulous with incurved grayish hairs, the margin of otherwise glabrous lfts either simply villosulous-ciliolate or at once ciUolate and finely setulose, nowhere glandular.
Stipules triangular or broadly lance-acuminate 5-16 x 1.5-3.5 mm, the firm blades densely coarsely setose dorsally, glabrous castaneous within, deciduous before the associated If.
Leaf-stalks (of all but a few smaller distal lvs, no further described) (13-) 15-30 cm, the petiole 1.5-4(-5.5) cm, at middle 1.1-2 mm diam., the longer interpiimal segments 10-17(-21) mm, the ventral groove bridged between pinnapairs and randomly spiculate; pinnae 10-20-jug., a little decrescent toward each end of lf-stk, the rachis of longer ones 3.5-7 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-3.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (17-)20-38-jug., the first pair ±0.5 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all narrowly oblong obtuse or subapiculate, the longer ones (5_)5.5-8.5 X (1-)1.2-1.9(-2.6) mm, aU smooth lustrous above, faintly (3(-5)-nerved beneath.
Peduncles solitary axillary (4.5-)6-17(-19) cm; capitula ovoid-ellipsoid or subglobose, without filaments 11-13(-14) mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts elliptic-oblanceolate 3.5-6 x 0.8-1.5 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the proximal ones staminate, the lowest sometimes not expanding; calyx campanulate 0.5-1 (-1.2) mm, ciliolate at and rarely just below orifice with weak setulae to (0.3-)0.5-1.2 mm; coroUa (4.2-) 5-6 mm, the narrowly funnelform tube glabrous extemally, the ovate, apically thickened lobes ±1.5 mm, densely setulose dorsally in distal %; filaments pale pink-lavender, monadelphous through 0.6-1 mm around base of ovary, exserted 9-14.5 mm.
Pods 1-8 per capitulum, sessile, in profile broadly linear or linear-oblanceolate 40-50 X 9-10.5 mm, the replum 1.3-2 mm wide, abruptly contracted distally into a cusplike beak ± 1.5-3 mm, the firm livid valves and replum alike densely setose overall with mixed stout and finer attenuate golden setae to 2-3.5 mm, the valves not seen fully mature but most probably falling entire from replum; seeds unknown.
In brejo and in campo mpestre, 1000-1400 m, known only from Chapada dos Veadeiros, at points 20 km s. to 50 km n. and n.-w. of Alto Paraiso, lat. ± 13°45'-14°10'S in e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-n. II-IV; IX-X. Among the complexly differentiated kindred of M. claussenii encountered at and above 1000 m on Chapada dos Veadeiros M. longepedunculata appears decisively characterized by low, thicket-forming habit of growth, relatively long peduncles, and relatively narrow, strongly compressed 6-8-seeded pods shortly but densely hispid overall with gold-bronze setae.
The plants are sometimes host to Pilostyles ulei Solms-Laubach (Rafflesiaceae).
248.
Mimosa setosissima Taubert, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 21: 434.
1896.-"[BraziL Goias:] .
.
. in montibus Serra dos Pyreneos: ULE n. 2853.— Flor. m. Aug. 1892."-Holotypus, +B; isotypus, HBG!; probable isotypi, Ule 101 F (hb. Glaziov.)! and as "M. nettoana Taub.,
" R! M. decorticans Harms in herb.—Abbade pres de Meia Ponte, 7.
IX.1894, Glaziou21105, +B = FNeg.
1404, G! K! NY! P! S! M. setosissima sensu Glaziou, 1906: 184.
Arborescent shrubs potentially attaining 3 m with trunk-diam. of ± 1 dm, the ample multifoliolate but relatively narrow lvs crowded toward the end of annotinous branches, the epidermis of these defoliating with their coat of setae and revealing a bare, softly furfuraceous brownish-orange under-bark, the homotinous stems and all axes of lvs and inflorescence densely setose with stout incurved-ascending yellowish setae to ± 2-3 mm intermixed with finer plain as well as random gland-tipped setulae and minute whitish villi, the inflorescence of axillary peduncles forming a compact terminal panicle immersed in foliage.
Stipules triangularor broadly lanceacuminate 3-6.5 X 1.5-3 mm, densely subappressed-setose dorsally, glabrous castaneous within, deciduous well before associated If.
Leafstalks 7-15.5 cm (of random early lvs sometimes shorter, no further described), the petiole including obese discolored pulvinus 3-10 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-8 mm; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae of larger lvs 14-24(-26)-jug., basipetally decrescent from well beyond mid-lf, the rachis of proximal pair 0.5-1 cm and that of longest distal pair (2-)2.3-4.2 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 25-45-jug., the first pair next to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), except for lowest proximal and furthest distal ones subequilong, the blades Unear-oblong obtuse, the larger ones 3.5-5 x 0.8- 1 mm, all setular-pubemlent dorsally, on margin setose-ciliolate and randomly glandular-setulose, smooth above, faintly 2-3-nerved beneath.
Peduncles (3.5-)4-6.5 cm; capitula subglobose, prior to anthesis conelike and densely setose, without filaments 13-14 mm diam.; bracts lanceelliptic 3-4.5 X 0.7-0.8 mm, densely setose dorsally from base upward; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some lower ones staminate but scarcely smaller; calyx ±0.8 mm, glabrous, the orifice minutely crenulate; corolla narrowly tubularfunnelform 6-6.5 mm, the tube glabrous, the ovate concave, scarcely callous-tipped lobes ± 1 mm, densely setulose dorsally at and above middle; filaments pink, monadelphous through 1- 1.5 mm, exserted ±8 mm.
Pods commonly 2-4 per capitulum, in profile oblong-elUptic 25-35 x 10-11 mm, broadly rounded at sessile base and abmptly cuspidate at apex by indurated stylebase scarcely 1 mm, the replum 1-1.5 mm wide, the valves shallowly corrugated over 5-8 seeds, the livid endocarp 0.1-0.2 mm thick in section and the papery, intemally red-brown furfuraceous endocarp 0.1 mm thick, the replum and valves alike densely ascending-setose overall and randomly glandular-setulose, the ripe valves separating entire from replum except at very base, irregularly recurving from tip to release the seeds, these not seen.
In cerrado, on stony ground, on creek-banks and about quartzite outcrops, 1000-1400 m, known only from Sa. dos Pireneus near 16°S in s.-centr. Goias, Brazil.-H. V, VIII-IX, the fuU season not known, the fmits long persistent on leafless annotinous stems.—A host to Pilostyles ulei Solms-Laub.
Mimosa setosissima stands as prototype of a replacement series of closely related forms isolated on remnants of arenitic caprock of the Tocantins-Paranaiba divide in southem Goias: M. setosissima itself on Sa. dos Pireneus, M. heringeri on the sources of rio Commba in Distrito Federal, and M. decorticans on Sa. dos Cristais.
To these should be added M. laniceps and M. densa of Chapada dos Veadeiros, the former distinguished by woolly indumentum and the latter by exceptionaUy short pinnae.
The diagnostic features of the group are tall-shmbby or arborescent life-form and the early deciduous epidermis which exposes a characteristic cinnamonbrown underbark on branchlets of the second year.
Mimosa setosissima most closely resembles M. decorticans in number and length of pinnae and leaflets, but has long-setose leaf-stalks, glabrous (non-ciliolate) calyx, and relatively short pods (2.5-3.5, not 4.5-6 cm long).
Mimosa heringeri, the small range of which lies between those of the two last, has on average fewer and longer pinnae than either (with consequently less crowded leaflets), the ciliolate calyx and long pod of M. decorticans, but the long peduncles of M. setosissima.
The taxonomic status of these obviously close kindred is debatable, but I have concluded that, on account of their spatial isolation and the impossibiUty of interbreeding, they may conveniently be classed as species.
249.
Mimosa decorticans Bameby, sp. nov., cum M. setosissima et M. densa manifeste affinibus sed allopatricis habitu toto, foliomm forma et praesertim ramulis annotinis epidermide exfoliata nudis cinnamomeis comparanda, ab ea pube setosa breviori, foliolis minoribus 2-3.5 (nec 3.5-5) mm usque longis, calycis ore ciliolato (nec nudo) necnon legumine longiori 4.5- 6 (nec 2.5-3.5) cm long, ab hac pinnamm majorum rachi breviori 16-25 (nec 23-43) mm usque longa, foliolis 25-31 (nec 30-47)-jugis usque, coroUaque breviori ±3.5-3.8 (nec 5- 5.5) mm longa diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: rod.
BR-7, km 620, Cristalina, 27.
III.1973 (fl + fr vet), Edmundo Pereira 7547.-Holotypus, BRADE 27057; isotypus, NY.
Amply leafy microphyllidious arborescent shrubs and treelets 2-3.5 m with tmnk attaining 1 dm diam., the epidermis of branchlets exfoliating with fall of lvs, the new foUage crowded at tip of homotinous branchlets on a framework of naked cinnamon-brown older ones, the axis of young stems, lvs and peduncles strigose with fine tapering appressed-ascending setae to ±1-1.5 mm commonly mixed with minute villi or subsessile glands or both, the tiny crowded lfts either glabrous or pubemlent above, commonly puberulent beneath, finely setulose-ciliolate, the inflorescence a compact, scarcely or shortly exserted pseudoraceme of conelike globose or squatly ovoid-ellipsoid capitula, the pods axillary.
Stipules caducous (little known), lanceor ovate-acuminate ±4-6 x 1.5-3 mm, intemally glabrous castaneous.
Leaf-stalks 6-16 cm, the petiole together with or reduced to the obese pulvinus 2.5-6 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 2-6(-6.5) mm, the ventral groove concealed by setae but continuous between pinna-pairs (spicules 0); pinnae (15-) 17-28-jug., strongly decrescent proximally and a little so distally, the rachis of longer ones 23-43 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.4-0.9 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 30- 47-jug., the first pair directly next to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all in outline narrowly oblong, linear, or (when very short) oblong-elUptic, obtuse or apiculate, smooth veinless above, weakly 1-2-nerved beneath.
Peduncles 2.5-5 cm; capitula without filaments 10-12 mm diam.; bracts oblanceolate mostly 5-6.5 x 0.9-1.5 mm, the lowest sometimes shorter, all setulose and usually glandular dorsally; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx 0.6-1 mm, the undulately truncate rim with few plain or gland-tipped setulae to 0.3-0.5 mm; corolla 3-5.5 mm, the narrowly funnelform tube glabrous, the ovate lobes 1-1.3 mm, 1-nerved, densely minutely setulose extemally; filaments pink fading whitish, monadelphous through ± 1 mm, exserted to 9-15 mm.
Pods ±2-4 per capitulum, sessile, when well fertilized broadly linear in profile 45-60 x 11-13 mm, the replum 1-2 mm wide, the low-convex valves shallowly depressed between the 8-11 seeds, the livid exocarp 0.05-0.1 mm and the papery-crustaceous endocarp 0.1-0.2 mm thick in section, the replum and valves alike densely strigose-hispid with forwardly subappressed-ascending setae to 1-1.5 mm mixed with shorter gland-tipped setulae, the ripe valves separating entire from all but very base of replum, recurved from apex to release the seeds, these not seen.
About sandstone outcrops in campo, ±1200- 1250 m, endemic to the heights of Sa. dos Cristais within a radius of ± 10 km of Cristalina, near 16°45'S in s.-e. Goias.-H. III-IV. Very closely related to M. densa, M. heringeri, and M. setosissima, which see for comment.
250.
Mimosa heringeri Bameby, sp. nov., statura arborescenti et praesertim ramulis annotinis defoliatis epidermide exfoliata cinnamomeis M. setosissimam et M. decorticantem simulans, ab ea calycis ore ciliato (nec glabro) et legumine majori 4.5-5.5 (nec 2.5-3.5) cm longo, ab hac, quoad calycem et legumen vix diversa, pedunculis elongatis 5-8 (nec 2.5-5) cm longis, pinnisque 7-18 (nec 17-28)-jugis minus confertis, ab ambabus pinnamm longiomm rachi 4-7 (nec 2.3-4.3) cm longa abstans.
Brazil.
Distrito Federal: Parque Municipal do Gama ±20 km s. of Brasilia, 28.
VIII.1965 (fr), Irwin (with Souza & Reis dos Santos) 7975.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, US.-Gama, 5.
V.1962 (fl + frjun), E. P. Heringer 597^—Paratypi, NY ex hb. BRADE 1168 = BRADE 23157, UB.
Unarmed, amply microphyllidious shrubs and treelets attaining 2.5—4 m with tmnk 8 cm diam., the ascending branches densely clad distally with crowded, narrowly ascending lvs, proximally defoliate and following prompt exfoliation of epidermis forming a framework of naked cinnamon-brown stems ±2.5-9 mm diam., the cauline and foUar axes strigose-hispid with forwardly subappressed tapering setae to 1-1.5 mm mixed with subsessile or short-stalked glands, the brownish-olivaceous, moderately lustrous lfts facially glabrous or dorsally pubemlent, ascendingsetuloseor glandular-ciliolate, the peduncles solitary axillary or passing upward into a short condensed, scarcely emergent pseudoraceme of ellipsoid capitula.
Stipules broadly lanceolate to 1 0 x 3 mm, the firm blades early dry caducous.
Leaf-stalks 4.5-18 cm, low-convex dorsally, narrowly continuously sulcate ventrally (spicules 0), the petiole including or reduced to the obese livid pulvinus 4.5-8(-15) mm, 1-3 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments of distally tapering lf-stk 6-10 mm; pinnae (5-)7-l8-jug., proximally decrescent, the axis of longer ones 4-7 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 31-57-jug., markedly decrescent proximally and less so distally, the blades narrowly oblong obtuse or subapiculate, the larger ones 3.5-5.5 x 1-1.3(-1.5) mm, aU lustrous smooth above, prominulously 3-nerved beneath, the centric midrib with 1-2 secondary venules.
Peduncles mostly solitary 5-8 cm; capitula without filaments 10-13 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform or incipiently conelike; bracts oblanceolate 2.5-4 mm, dorsally setose and stipitateglandular; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some proximal ones staminate but scarcely smaller; calyx ±0.5 mm, its subtmncate orifice ciliolate with fine, at times partly gland-tipped setulae 0.6-1 mm; corolla 4.8-5.4 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 1.2-1.5 mm, densely appressedsetulose dorsally; filaments pinkish-lavender fading whitish, monadelphous through 0.5-0.6 mm, exserted to 9-17 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum subsessile, in profile broadly Unear-oblong 45-55 X 10-11 mm, the replum ±1.5 mm wide, the convex valves consisting of livid exocarp ±0.05 mm and crustaceous endocarp to 0.2 mm thick in section, the replum and valves alike densely hispid-strigose and viscid with forwardly ascending bulbous-based setae intermingled with subsessile or short-stipitate glands, the valves when ripe separating entire from replum and falling in one piece; seeds ±7-9, transverse, plumpy obovoid 5-6 x 4.5 mm, the testa lustrously castaneous.
In moist stony soils of brejo and on creekbanks, 950-1100 m, known only from the soiuces of Ribeira do Gama immediately to the s. and s.-w. of the city of Brasilia, in Distrito Federal, BrazU.-Fl.
II-V(-VIII).
Closely akin to M. setosissima and M. decorticans; for comment see under the former.
This handsome species is dedicated to Dr. Ezechias Paulo Heringer (IBGE, Brasilia), whose numerous, judiciously chosen, beautifully prepared and widely distributed collections of planaltine Mimosae have provided invaluable information on the morphology and dispersal of the genus.
251.
Mimosa densa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 405.
1842.—Typus infra sub var. densa indicatur.
Round-headed arborescent shrubs attaining 2- 4 m, the tmnk to 12 cm diam., the lvs and short immersed panicle of relatively small, squatly ovoid or globose capitula crowded together on an axis ± 1-1.5 dm, the epidermis of branchlets promptly exfoliating with fall of lvs, the annotinous and older stems reddish-brown, the axes of lvs and inflorescences densely strigose or silkyvillous with forwardly incurved or subappressed, distally short-attenuate or long-flagelliform setae to ± 1.5-3 mm, the lfts glabrous above or on both faces, ciliolate.
Stipules deltateor lance-acuminate 2.5-6 X 1-3.5 mm, the firm caducous blades chocolate-brown and glabrous within.
Leaf-stalks 5-9(-10) cm, the first pair of pinnae not over 5 mm distant from hard obese pulvinus, the longer interpinnal segments (2-)2.5-6.5 mm, the ventral groove continuous (spicules 0); pinnae 10-32(-42)-jug., strongly decrescent proximally and a little so distally, the rachis of longer ones 16-25 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-0.7 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 24-36- jug., the first pair next to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades narrowly oblong obtuse, the largest (1.5-)2-4 X 0.5-0.8 mm, the blades obscurely venulose dorsally.
Peduncles 2-5 cm; capitula without fUaments 8-10 mm diam., conelike when young and densely sericeous, moriform just prior to anthesis; bracts elUptic-oblanceolate or spatulate 1.8-3 mm, densely setulose dorsally; y/owers 4-merous 8-androus, all but the lowest bisexual; calyx pappiform, the extemally glabrous tube 0.4-0.5 mm, the fringe of cilia ± 1-1.3 mm; coroUa narrowly tvu^binate or fiinnelform (3-)3.3- 3.8 mm, the tube glabrous, the ovate concave lobes 0.7-1.2 mm, densely setulose dorsally; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.5-0.7 mm around base of ovary, exserted 6-9.5 mm.
Pods (of var. densa, otherwise unknown) 2—4 per capitulum, erect subsessile, in profile narrowly oblong or oblong-oblanceolate 30-5 5 X 10-12 mm, broadly cuneate at base, abmptly contracted distally into a stout erect cusp 2-A mm, 5-9-seeded, the straight replum 1.5-2 mm wide, the lowconvex valves ±0.2 mm thick in section (exoand endocarp of subequal thickness), the replum and valves alike densely subappressed-setose overall, the ripe valves separating entire from replmn but commoiUy remairung attached at very base; seeds not seen.
Among several superficially similar microphyllidious Pachycarpae of highland Goias M. densa is known by the coincidence of exfoliating epidermis of annotinous branches, relatively short crowded spreading leaves, and immersed panicle of relatively small capitula.
The framework of naked cinnamon-brown older branches bearing aloft tufts of foliage recalls M. setosissima and M. laniceps, but these differ collectively in larger capitula composed of longer flowers with further exserted filaments.
Allopatric M. setosissima differs further in glabrous (not densely ciUate, hence pappiform) calyx, and sympatric M. laniceps in silky-tomentose vesture of extremely fine flagelliform setae, and perhaps also in a broader pod (as far as known 11-15, not 10-12 mm wide).
The also sympatric M. struthionoptera has not only much larger flowers and longer filaments but elongate leafy homotinous branches, and characteristically erect, not spreading subrosulate leaves.
Mimosa densa consists of two vicariant varieties: 1.
Setae of lf-axes at once evenly distributed and forwardly subappressed; stipules deltate or triangular 1.5-3.5 mm wide at base; Chapada dos Veadeiros in lat. ± 13'*20'-14°S 25 la. var. densa (p. 411).
1.
Setae of lf-axes mostly united at base into transverselyflabelliformclusters, proximally erect but distally incurved into slender flagelliform tip; stipules lanceolate, at base 1-1.5 mm wide; sources of rio Parana near S. Joao da Alian^a s. just into Distrito Federal in lat. ± 14*'50'-l 5°30'S.
25 lb. var. alligantina (p. 411).
251a. Mimosa densa Bentham var. densa.
M. densa Bentham, 1842, I.e., sens, str.—"Brazil, Pohl.^\ the locality particularized in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 390.1876: "in summitate montium S. Feliz ad Santa Ana [n.-w. of Cavalcante] provinciae Goyaz."
—Holotypus, Pohl d.l425 = 1974, collected in VII.1819 (fl jun), K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 7976; isotypi, NY! W! Characters as given in key to varieties.
On open rocky slopes and summits in cerrado or campo mpestre, 1200-1800 m, apparently endemic to the Tocantins-Parana watershed between the head of rio S. Felix and Alto Paraiso, in lat. 13°20'-14°S, in e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.— ¥1.
V-VIII. 251b. Mimosa densa Bentham var. alligantina Bameby, var. nov., a var. densa pube e setis basi erectis deinde incurvis attenuatis vel flagelliformibus (nec subappresse strigosis), iis folii axium dorsalium basi palmatim conjunctis constanti diversa, ulterius ut videtur stipulis angustioribus lanceolatis abstans.—BrazU.
Goias: 13 km s. of S. Joao da Alian^a, 21.
III. 1973 (fl), W. R. Anderson (with Kalin Arroyo, Hill, Reis dos Santos & Souza) 7593. — Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, R, US. Characters as given in key to varieties.
In habitats of var. densa but at 1000-1125 m, and flowering 2-3 months earlier in the year, known only from the upper Parana valley 13-20 km s. of S. Joao da Alian^a near lat. 14°50'S in e.-centr. Goias, and on Chapada das Perdiz in Distrito Federal, BrazU.—R. III-IV. The var. alligantina was first collected by Glaziou (21107) in December 1894 and reported in his Liste (1906: 183) as M. densa.
252.
Mimosa laniceps Bameby, nom. nov. M. tomentosa Taubert, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 21: 434.
1896, nom. illeg.—"Habitat in valle rivi Vargem Grande [Goias]: ULE n. 2832.—Flor. m. Sept. [1892]."-Holotypus, +B; isotypus, HAMB!; probable isotypus, Ule 9, P (hb. Glaziov.)!—NonM. tomentosa y^illdenow, 1806.
M. tomentosa sensu Glaziou, 1906: 184.—Specimen authent.: Glaziou 21087, C! = F Neg. 21892, K! P! Roundor flat-topped, amply leafy arborescent shrubs 12-15 dm, the tmnk attaining 6 cm diam. and the annotinous branches 4-8 mm, resembling closely related M. setosissima and M. densa in habit and early exfoliating epidermis of stems, the homotinous leafy branchlets mostly less than 1.5 dm with spreading crowded lvs, sometimes elongating to 2.5 dm and the lvs then more distant and ascending, the cauline and foliar axes and those of the short immersed or subimmersed pseudoraceme of plumply ovoidsubglobose capitula densely silky-tomentose with extremely fine, usually contorted hairlike setae to 1.5-4 mm, the young growth canescently lanate.
Stipules firm lanceolate or triangular-acuminate 6-11 X 2-3 mm, tomentose extemally, glabrous castaneous within, caducous.
Leaf-stalks including obese pulvinus and very short or subobsolete petiole 4-14(-17) cm, the longer interpinnal segments 3-6 mm; interpinnal spicules 0; /7z>2«<2^ of larger lvs 14-25(-30)-jug., strongly decrescent toward pulvinus and again but less so distally, the rachis of longer pinnae 14-36 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20-35-jug., the first pair next to pulvinus (paraphyUidia 0), all except those at ends of rachis subequilong and in outline narrowly oblong obtuse, the larger ones 2.5-4(-4.5) X 0.7-1 mm, aU glabrous glossy on both faces or remotely pubemlent beneath, finely ciUolate.
Peduncles 2-5(-6) cm; capitula without filaments 12-15 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts oblanceolate (3-)4-7 x 1-1.5 mm, densely silky-setose dorsally; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower staminate; calyx campanulate 0.5-0.8 mm, glabrous extemally, the orifice ciliate with setulae 0.6-1.2 mm; corolla 5.5-6.3 mm, the narrowly funnelform tube glabrous extemally, the ovate incurved lobes 1.4-2 mm, densely silky-setulose dorsally; filaments pink fading whitish, monadelphous through nearly 1.5 mm, exserted (13-) 14-18 mm.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, sessile, turgidly oblong-ellipsoid 45-55 X 11-19 mm, the replum 1.5-3 mm wide, the nigrescent exocarp of valves to 0.4 mm thick, concealed by a dense woolly-silky fleece of fine setae intermixed with few stouter flagelliform ones, the valves persisting entire but coiling backward from apex to release the seeds, these not seen.
In quartzite sand on and around outcrops, 1000-1300 m, colonial on rocky ridges of Chapada dos Veadeiros within a radius of ±25 km n. and s. of Alto Paraiso, near 14°S in e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-H. IX, I-III. Mimosa laniceps is closely akin to sympatric M. densa, but distinguished by longer flowers (hence fatter capitula) and larger pods, and most obviously further by dense lanate-silky vesture of the young leaves and inflorescence.
Allopatric M. setosissima has similar flowers, but strigosesetose vesture and rim of calyx glabrous.
253.
Mimosa pycnocoma Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 405.
1842.-"BrazU, PohV'- Holotypus, Pohl d.l408 = 1927, collected VII.1819 (fl) "ad Serra do S. Felix prope Rio Trahiras [centr. Goias near 13°30'S]'', K!; isotypi, GH! NY! US! W!; probable isotypus, Pohl s.n.,
M!—Wrongly equated by Bentham, 1875: 440, 1876: 389, with M. claussenii.
Probably arborescent but stature not recorded, the epidermis of defoliate annotinous branches early exfoliating and exposing cinnamon-brown wood, the homotinous branch-tips densely leafy unarmed, setose with ascending, basally bulbous but distally fine silky flagelliform setae to ±6 mm, the lf-stks setose with similar but retrorsely descending setae, the smooth, when dry dark brown lustrous leaflets facially glabrous ciliate, the inflorescence (known only in early anthesis) a small subcorymbose pseudoraceme of subglobose capitula nestling in foliage.
Stipules broadly triangular-ovate-acuminate ±7-8 x 4 mm, the firm blade densely pilose dorsally, glabrous castaneous within, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 9-13 cm, the petiole and obese pulvinus together 1-1.5 cm, the longer interpinnal segments ±6-7 mm, the ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae 12-17-jug., strongly decrescent proximally, scarcely so distally, the rachis of longer ones 4-5 cm, its longer interfoliolar segments ±1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae ±25- jug., the first pair next to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all in outline narrowly oblong obtuse mucronulate, the longer ones attaining 7 x 1 .
5 mm, the blades ciliate when young with fine pliant setae, these distaUy eroded in age.
Peduncles ±3.5 cm; capitula without filaments ± 10 mm diam., prior to anthesis densely silky-setose overall; bracts oblanceolate ± 3 mm, dorsally setose from base upward, the longer distal setae as long as the bract itself and surpassing the associated fl; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lowest staminate; calyx ±0.3 mm, glabrous extemally, the rim densely setose with plain cilia to ±1.7 mm; corolla 3.5-4 mm, the narrowly funnelform tube glabrous, the ovate incurved lobes ± 1 mm, silkysetulose dorsally; filaments (probably pink) monadelphous through 0.7-1.2 mm, exserted ± 8 mm; pod unknown.
Habitat not recorded, but to be sought in campo mpestre at or above 1000 m, known only from the type collection from the Tocantins-Parana divide near 13°30'S in centr. Goias, Brazil.-Fl.
VII-VIII(-?).
Mimosa pycnocoma, described by Bentham in his first paper on Brazilian Mimosa, was referred without comment in his summary monographs (1875, 1876) to the synonymy of M claussenii.
Its close relationship lies, I believe, in the direction not of M. claussenii but of the arborescent group clustering around M. setosissima of Sa. dos Pireneus, M. decorticans of Sa. dos Cristais, and M. densa and M. laniceps of Chapada dos Veadeiros, with all of which it shares the striking feature of exfoliating epidermis of year-old stems and, inferentially, a framework of cinnamonbrown branches.
It differs from M. setosissima in the longer finer setae of stems and young leaflet-margins, in absence of glandular setulae, in larger and fewer leaflets, in smaller capitula composed of flowers shorter by one-third, and in much shorter, densely ciliate calyx.
Mimosa densa and M. laniceps differ collectively from M. pycnocoma in abbreviated pinnae attaining at most 16-30 (not 40-50) mm in length, and M. laniceps, which is geographically the nearer, further in silky-tomentose vesture and substantially longer flowers.
254.
Mimosa oligosperma Bameby, sp. nov., juxta M. densam Benth. et affines ramulis cito decorticatis cinnamomeis distinctas coUocanda, ab eas omnes praecipue legumine parvo eUiptico ±1.5 (nec 3-4.5)-plo longiore quam latiore 4-5 (nec 5-10)-spermo diversa, ulterius a M. densa in altis montium Chapada dos Veadeiros vicina pinnis longioribus 25-40 (nec 16-25) mm longis, foliolis pauUo majoribus, flosculisque 4.5-5 (nec 3-3.8) mm longis distans.—Brazil.
Goias: Cavalcante, anno 1828 (fl, fr), W. J. Burchell 7975.-Holotypus, K . - Between As Araras and Cavalcante, Burchell 7886. —Paratypus, K, mounted on same sheet with holotypus = NY Neg. 11654.
M. claussenii sensu Bentham, 1876: 389, minori ex parte, quoad pi. burchellianas supra cit.
Unarmed shrubs of unrecorded stature, sometimes of diffuse habit ("espalhado"), with slender cinnamon-brown annotinous branchlets ±3-6 mm diam. and lvs crowded toward branch-tips, the young shoots and lf-stks densely hispid with ascending attenuate setae to ± 2-3 mm, at dilated base 0.2-0.3 mm diam., glandular (if at all) only on floral bracts, the brownish-olivaceous foliage concolorous, the firm plane lfts mostly glabrous lustrous on both faces, the proximal ones of some pinnae thinly setose dorsally, all densely setoseciliate, the axillary peduncles forming a short pseudo-corymb of globose capitula surpassed by lvs.
Stipules firm triangular-lanceolate 4-7 x 2- 3 mm, dorsally setose like stem, glabrous castaneous within, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 4-9 cm, the petiole including obese pulvinus 2-12 x 1.1- 1.6 mm, the interpinnal segments 4-8 mm; spicules 0; pinnae of longer lvs 10-12-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer distal ones 2.5- 4 cm, the longer interfoUolar segments 0.6-1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 28-40-jug., subequilong except at ends of rachis, the first pair close to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), aU in outline narrowly lance-oblong from proximaUy obtusangvUate base, obtuse or acute, the longer ones (3-)3.5-6 x 0.8- 1.2 mm, 3.8-5 times as long as wide, aU when mature extemally veinless or very obscurely centri-costate.
Peduncles solitary (2-)2.5-6 cm; capitula without filaments ±11 mm diam.; bracts linear-oblanceolate or -elliptic 2.5-4.5 x 0.5-1.1 mm, on back densely setose and sometimes also glandular-setulose, either glabrous or pubemlent Yentra)\y;flowers4-merous 8-androus; calyx-tube shallowly campanulate 0.3-0.5 mm, its subtmncate rim ciliate with fine stramineous setae to ± 1 mm; corollas narrowly funnelform, those at and above mid-capitulum 4.5-5 mm, the tube glabrous, the ovate acute thin-textured lobes 1.3- 1.6 X 0.9-1 mm, silky-setulose dorsally; filaments united at very base, exserted ± 8 mm.
Pods 1-few per capitulum, in profile elliptic or oblongelUptic 14-20 X 9-12 mm, less than twice as long as wide, 4-5-seeded, the replum 1-2.5 mm wide, produced into a very short cusp, the firm valves falling entire from replum, the livid exocarp 0.2-0.4 mm thick in section, the replum and valves alike densely setose with erect-incurved subcontiguous setae to 2-2.5 mm long, at base 0.2-0.5 mm diam. and commonly there stellately branched; seeds plumply ovoid-lenticular 4.2-5.2 X 3.5-4.2 mm, the testa light brown lustrous.
In unrecorded habitat, to be expected in campo mpestre or about sandstone outcrops near and above 1000 m, known only from s.e. tributaries of rio Tocantins between Cavalcante and Niquelandia, near 13°45'-14°30'S in centr. Goias, Brazil.-Fl. season not established.
Mimosa oligosperma seems closely related to M. densa and its relatives, all of which could be envisaged as detached vicariant offshoots of one comprehensive species-complex.
It differs from all these in a very small few-seeded pod, and from M. densa, a near neighbor on the southem spurs of Chapada dos Veadeiros and Chapada do Parana, in somewhat longer pinnae and slightly larger leaflets and flowers.
The only modem collection of M. oligosperma known to me (Macedo 3633, NY) is described by the collector as arbusto espalhado da serra, all that we know at present of the plant's habit or stature.
The type and paratype of M. oligosperma were referred by Bentham to a broadly conceived and highly polymorphic M. claussenii.
255.
Mimosa rhodostegia Bameby, sp. nov., stipulis magnis inter se post petiolum in 1aminam amplam folium Bauhiniae revocantem connatis M. reginae affinis, sed ramulis annotinis haud pachycaulibus (±4, nec 15-20 mm diam.) moUiter viscido-villosulis (nec setis fagelliformibus comosis), pedunculis brevioribus (2.5-4, nec 5-8 cm), capituUs minoribus (±12, nec 20 mm diam.) necnon coroUae brevioris (4.5-6, nec 7-8 mm longae) lobulis extus parce villosulis (nec densissime scabrosetulosis) diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: arrededores da sede do Parque Nacional do Tocantins, 46 km w. de Veadeiros, 25.
IX.1967 (fl + fr annot.), de Haas Sr. (with /.
H. de Haas & R. P. Belem) 307 = BRADE 50348.-Holotypus, NY; isotypus, NY.
Fig.
17.
Arborescent shrubs attaining 4 m, the trunkdiam. unknown, the unarmed, densely amply leafy branchlets to ±4 mm diam., except for glabrous upper face of very numerous small lfts softly viscid-villosulous throughout with fine white eglandular hairs intermixed with slender gland-tipped setulae, the lf-axes in addition hispid with fine yellowish setae to 2-6 mm, the inflorescence in early anthesis a congested terminal pseudoraceme ±1.5 dm of subglobose capitula subtended by dilated papery stipules and emergentjuvenile lvs, the fmits (known only from annotinous examples) probably immersed in foliage.
Stipules ovate-acuminate 15-25 x 7-13 mm, united behind petiole through V3-V2 their length, the early deflexed persistent blades papery reddish-brown, striately many-nerved, villosulous on both faces, the exterior margin often obscurely denticulate.
Leaf-stalks 10-22 cm, the petiole ±5 x 1.5 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 4-6 mm; spicules 0; pinnae 25-44-jug., decrescent proximally but otherwise subequilong, the rachis of longer pinnae 22-32 mm, the first pair of lfts close to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-0.8 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 30-45-jug., very densely obliquely imbricate, in outline Unear-oblong obtuse straight, the larger ones 3-4 x 0.6-0.8 mm, all 3-nerved from pulvinule, the centric midrib 1-2-branched beyond middle.
Peduncles slender 2.5-4 cm; capitula without filaments ±12 mm diam., prior to anthesis comose with emergent bracts, these narrowly lanceolate, attenuate from middle toward each end, (4-)5-7 x 0.6-0.8 mm, the firm blade thinly villosulous and glandularsetulose dorsally, pectinately setose-ciliate;y/ovvers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate and a little shorter than the bisexual ones; 5 mm 3cm 3 mm 3 mm.
0 FIG. 17.
Mimosa rhodostegia Bameby.
A. Top offloweringstem.
B. Detail of stem-pubescence.
C. Leaflet, dorsal view.
D, E. Flowers.
F. Roral bracts.
G. Pod.
H. Seed. (All from De Haas 307.) calyx campanulate 0.6-1 mm, extemally glabrous, the rim with unequal cilia to 0.4-0.7 mm; corolla 4.5-6 mm, the narrowly funnelform tube glabrous, the ovate 1-nerved membranous lobes 1.1-1.3 mm, thinly villosulous dorsally; filaments pink, at base connate through 0.5 mm or more around the ovarian stipe, exserted ± 10 mm.
Pods solitary ascending subsessUe, in profile broadly Unear-oblong obtuse 45-55 x 11-13 mm, abmptly cuspidate by a beak 3-5 mm, the replum 1-5 mm wide, the valves firm, when dry ±0.4 mm thick in section, low-convex over each of 7- 10 seeds, together with replum densely villosulous and thinly glandular-setulose overall, when ripe separating from replum entire; seeds in broad profile ± 6 x 4 mm, the testa fuscous-castaneous, brightly lustrous.
On stream-bank in campo, probably near or above 1000 m, known only from the type-locality on the w. slope of Chapada dos Veadeiros, near 14°10'S in e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.—Fl.
IXX(-?).
Mimosa rhodostegia resembles M. regina in enlarged connate stipules, a character unique to these sibling species of ser. Pachycarpae.
I am apprehensive about describing from single collections two species so clearly related, for new samples may very well devaluate some characters that at present appear sharply diagnostic.
The differences in pubescence may prove illusory, but the stature of the plants, the differing texture and venation of the stipules, and different size of capitula and flowers cannot be passed over.
It is noteworthy that M. rhodostegia and M. regina were collected in like stages of early anthesis at different seasons of the year, the former in late Sepember, at the beginning of the wet season, the latter in late March, at the outset of the dry season.
They may be differentiated in their life-cycles as are M. melanocarpa and sympatric forms of M. setosa.
Further observation of these strangely modified mimosas is required.
256.
Mimosa regina Bameby, sp. nov., inter Pachycarpas arborescentes pachycladas stipulis maximis notabilis et eo signo sola cum M. rhodostegia comparanda, ab hac ramis annotinis crassis 10-15 mm diam. setis flagelliformibus 5-10 mm usque longis comosis (nec breviter viscido-villosulis), stipulis firmioribus, obscure venulosis, extus setosis intus glabris castaneis et cito deciduis (nec chartaceis multistriatis utrinque villosulis et persistentibus deflexis), pedunculis 5-8 (nec 2.5-4) cm longis, capitulisque absque filamentis ±20 (nec 12) mm diam. manifeste diversa.
Habitu, statura et indumento cum M. manidea (specie subsympatrica) quadrat, sed stipulis vero distans.—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros ±20 km n. of Alto Paraiso, 25.
III.1971 (fl ineunte), Irwin (with Harley & G. L. Smith) 557^5.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, GH, K, LE, MBM, NY, P, R, S, US. Unarmed pachycaulous trees attaining 4 m with tmnk nearly 1 dm diam. and densely leafy hornotinous branches to 1.5 cm diam., these terminating in a massive, shortly exserted simple pseudoraceme of large, plumply globose-ellipsoid capitula subtended by ample dilated bracteiform stipules, the stems and lf-stk pilose with flagelliform setae to 0.5-1 mm mixed with fine short vUU and short gland-tipped setulae, the very numerous tiny lfts glabrous facially, minutely villousand glandular-ciliolate.
Stipules ovateor broadly lance-acuminate 25-30 x 7-13 mm, the lower ones connate behind the petiole, the upper free, the firm blades densely flagelliformsetose extemally, glabrous castaneous within, the venulation immersed, the blades early dry deciduous.
Leaf-stalks crowded toward tip of branches 12-20 cm, the petiole with pulvinus 7- 12 X 1.5-2 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 4-7 mm, the shallow ventral sulcus weakly bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae 25-32-jug., strongly decrescent downward in proximal V4-blade, the longer distal ones 3.5-5.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 35-47-jug., the first pair close to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all in outline oblong obtuse, at base minutely cordate on both sides, the longer ones 3.5-4.5 x 0.8-1.3 mm, the firm plane blades veinless above, beneath 3-nerved from pulvinule, the centric costa weakly branched distally.
Peduncles mostly paired and often subtended by a nascent If shorter than themselves, at anthesis 5-8 cm; capitula without filaments ±25 x 20 mm, prior to anthesis densely yellowish-setose; bracts spatulate-oblanceolate 7-9 X 1.5-0.8 mm, dorsally above middle densely yellowish-setose and -setose-ciliate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate and slightly shorter than the rest; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.6-0.8 mm, obscurely lobulate, each lobe bearing a short gland-tipped setula, otherwise glabrous; corolla tubular-funnelform 7-8 mm, the tube glabrous, the ovate lobes ±1.4 mm, distally concave and subcallose, densely setulose dorsally; filaments pink, monadelphous through ± 1 mm around stipe of ovary, the longer ones exserted 13-17 mm; pod unknown.
On sandstone outcrops in cerrado or campo mpestre, known only from the type-locality on Chapada dos Veadeiros at a point 20 km n. of Alto Paraiso, near 1250 m, in e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-H. III-IV. A spectacular mimosa, notable for its pachycaul habit, very large but early deciduous bracts and stipules of firm texture, dorsally setose and glabrous within.
It resembles M. rhodostegia in amplitude of bracts, but in growth-form and in coarse setose indumentum it seems closer to the nearly sympatric M. manidea.
From this it differs strikingly in the intemally glabrous and deciduous bracts and stipules, more numerous leaflets per pinna, and longer flowers.
257.
Mimosa manidea Barneby, sp. nov., inter Pachycarpas arborescentes rosulifolias imprimis ramis annotinis stipulis triangularibus antrorsus imbricatis et utrinque setosis confertim squamatis praestans, ulterius ab arete affini M. oedoclada pube eglandulosa, foliomm pinnis 18-30 (nec 8-15)-jugis usque, foliolisque minimis 2.5-3.5 (nec 4-6) mm usque longis diversa. —Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros ± 12 km n.-w. of Veadeiros, 1200 m, 19.x. 1965 (fr), Irwin (with Souza & Reis dos Santos) 9252.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, K, LE, NY, R, S, US.—Chapada dos Veadeiros, 21.
XII. 1967 (fl),^.
P. Duarte 10677 = BRADE 48823. - Paratypus, NY.
Fig.
18.
M. decorticans Harms ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 184.
1906, nom. nud.-"Chapadao dos Veadeiros, Goyaz, [Glazioul 21089.
Arbrisseau superbe, sans fleur en Janvier."
—Specimina authent.,
C! G! K (sub n. 210921) M (sub 21059)1 P! Unarmed pachycaul rosette-trees closely resembling M. oedoclada in habit, attaining 2-A m in height with tmnk to 8(-?) cm diam., the stout annotinous branchlets clothed below the subrosulate or at least densely crowded lvs of current season with a thatch of upwardly imbricate persistent stipules, the young stems and lf-axes hispid with stout, partly confluent or branched, yellowish setae to 2-6 mm and to 0.4-0.7 mm diam. at base, these mixed with short clavate pallid, apparently non-secretory setulae, the short terminal pseudoraceme of ovoid-ellipsoid or globose capitula immersed in foliage.
Stipules triangular 5-8 X 2.5-4.5 mm, the tough-textured blades very densely appressed-setose on both faces, persistent for about a year after fall of associated If.
Leaf-stalks 5-11 cm, the petiole 5- 10 X 1-1.5 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 3-5 mm; spicules 0; pinnae of larger lvs (18-)20- 30-jug., strongly decrescent proximally, otherwise subequilong, the rachis of longer ones 17- 30 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 16-29-jug., the first pair next to pulvinus (no paraphyUidia), the blades ovate-oblong or oblong, obtuse or apiculate, the larger ones 2.5-3.5 x 0.8-1.2 mm, aU glabrous above, commonly pubemlent but eglandular beneath, setose-ciliolate, weakly 3-nerved.
Inflorescence of M. oedoclada, but bracts densely setose their whole length dorsally and the flowers a little smaller, the corolla 5-5.5 mm, its lobes densely yellowish-setulose dorsally; filaments monadelphous through ±1 mm.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, sessile, in profile broadly elliptic obtuse 25-35 X 12-18 mm, 4-6-seeded, the replum 1.5-2 mm wide, the convex valves firm-textured, like the replum densely coarsely setose overall, eglandular, when ripe falling entire from replum; seeds unknown.
On rocky hillsides in thin cerrado scrub or campo mpestre subject to periodic fires, 1200- 1600 m, endemic to Chapada dos Veadeiros in e.-centr. Goias, Brazil (24 km s. of Terezina; points between 10 and 17 km n. of Alto Paraiso).-H. XII-III. Mimosa manidea is one of a sympatric pair of arborescent mimosas endemic to the heights of Chapada dos Veadeiros, spectacular colonial species notable for pachycaul tmnk and candelabriform branches bearing leaves and capitula clustered at tip of the current year's growth.
The differences between the pair are discussed further under M. oedoclada.
The epithet manidea refers to the coarse overlapping armature of scalelike stipules that clothe the year-old leafless stems, scales that suggest those of the pangolin (Manis pentadactyla).
258.
Mimosa capito Bameby, sp. nov., inter affines arborescentes pachycladas inflorescentia in capitulescentiam sessilem subsphaericam contracta coroUisque elongatis (6-7 mm) glaberrimis insignis, a vicinis M. oedoclada et M. manidea foliis multo majoribus, ulterius a priori ramulorum cortice haud exfolianti, ulterius a secunda stipulis cito deciduis diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Sa. dos Veadeiros, Palmital, 29.x. 1965 (fl), E. Pereira 10974 = A. P. FIG. 18.
Mimosa manidea Bameby.
A. Summit branchlet, showing new leaves and flowers, and fruits of preceding season.
B. Leaflet, dorsal view.
C. Rower.
D. Floral bract, dorsal (right) and ventral (left) views. (A, B from Irwin 9282; C, D from W. R. Anderson 6649.) Duarte 9^6i.-Holotypus, BRADE 37272; isotypi, NY, RB.
Pachycaul treelets 2-3 m with trunk attaining ± 1 dm diam. and symmetrically branched crown of stout defoliate branches bearing a rosette of amply microphyllidious lvs, the annotinous branchlets ± 1-1.5 cm diam., transversely ridged by Ifand stipule-scars but the bark not exfoliating, the Ifand inflorescence-axes densely hispid with flagelliform setae to 3-4 mm long and 0.2-0.3 mm diam. at bulbous base, below the floral bracts eglandular, the subcoriaceous lfts concolorous, when dry brown-olivaceous lustrous glabrous on both faces, setose-ciliate, the inflorescence of globose capitula pseudocorymbosely crowded into a dense cluster nestled in the terminal If-rosette.
Stipules coriaceous triangular-lanceolate ±10 X 4 mm, densely setose dorsally, glabrous within, early deciduous.
Leaf stalks 12-22 cm, the petiole including (or reduced to) the obese hard pulvinus 5-15 x 3-4 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 7-11 mm, the narrow ventral sulcus bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae 14-22-jug., strongly decrescent proximally but scarcely so distally, the rachis of longer ones 6-8 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.2-1.8 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 33-55-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair close to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades oblong from bluntly auriculate base, obtuse or subapiculate, the longer ones 5.5-8 x 1.7-2.5 mm, 3.1-3.5 times as long as wide, all faintly or subobsoletely 2>-Anerved from pulvinule, the slightly excentric midrib a little porrect beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles at anthesis 1.5-2.5 cm, subtended by an incipiently expanding hysteranthous If; capitula without filaments 15-17 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike and densely setose overall; bracts linear-oblanceolate 5.5-7.5 x 0.7-1 mm, barbate dorsally with plain and a few gland-tipped setae; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, all but a few lower ones bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.6-0.8 mm, its subtmncate orifice ciliolate with a few plain and gland-tipped setulae 0.2-0.3 mm; corolla glabrous overall, narrowly vase-shaped 6-7 mm, the ovate-triangular subacute 1-nerved lobes 1.2-1.5 mm; filaments lilac-pink, united below ovary into a stemonozone ±0.7 mm, exserted 10-15 mm; ovary setose after fertilization; pod unknown.
Colonial on rocky ridges and hilltops in campo mpestre, 1000-1200 m, known only from the heights of Chapada dos Veadeiros in the vicinity of Alto Paraiso, ± 14°-14°10'S in e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-n. X-XII. Mimosa capito differs from the several compatriot pachycaul arborescent species in the dense inflorescence of shortly pedunculate capitula nestling in the terminal rosettes of ample leaves and in the completely hairless corollas.
It has larger leaves than either M. oedoclada or M. manidea and differs from the first of these in nonexfoliating bark of annotinous branchlets and from the second by early deciduous stipules.
Its close neighbors M. densa and M. laniceps have exfoliating bark combined with smaller leaves, fewer leaflets, shorter peduncles, smaller flowers, or some of these characters combined.
The foliage is completely eglandular, but there are a few capitate excretory setulae hidden among the longer plane setae of the floral bracts.
In this respect the species recalls M. claussenii, in practice easily distinguished by an extended inflorescence and setulose corolla-lobes.
259.
Mimosa oedoclada Bameby, sp. nov., habitu arborescenti pachycauli ramisque candelabriformibus apice rosulifoliis insignis, proxime M. manideae affinis sed pube ex parte viscida, stipulis mox deflexis subglabris viscidis (nec utrinque setosis) cum folio suo deciduis (ramis annotinis ergo nudis, nec imbricatim squamosis), foUomm majorum piimis 8-15 (nec 18-30)-jugis, foliolisque majoribus 4-6 (nec 2.5-3.5) mm usque longis diversa.— Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros ±20 km n. of Alto Paraiso, ±1200 m, 19.
III.1971 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Harley & G. L. Smith) 32230. - Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, US. Unarmed pachycaul rosette-trees or arborescent shrubs at anthesis 1.5-5 m, with blackish tmnk attaining 18 cm diam. and few, awkwardly ascending leafless candelabriform branches 6-15 mm diam. marked by transverse If-scars, the current lvs and short terminal pseudoraceme of globose yeUow-setulose capitula crowded at tip of branchlets, the If-axes and peduncles hispid with yellowish attenuate setae to 2-5 mm long and 0.2-0.3 mm diam. at swollen base, mixed with fine short villi and fine setulae capped with an orange viscid head, the many small lfts finely villosulous beneath or on both faces, ciliolate.
Stipules early reflexed, broadly lanceor triangular-acuminate 6-11 X 2.5-5.5 mm, intemally glabrous castaneous (exceptionally thinly setose), extemally orange-glandular, setose-ciliate, deciduous with associated If.
Leaf-stalks 4.5-10 cm, the petiole including stout livid pulvinus 5-10 mm, near first pinna-pair 1.5-2 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 4-8 mm, spicules 0; pinnae 8-15-jug., strongly decrescent proximally, otherwise subequilong, the rachis of longer ones 25-35 mm, the first pair of lfts next to pulvinus or rarely degraded to minute paraphyllidia, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 14-20-jug., in outline ovateoblong or oblong, obtuse or subapiculate, the longer ones 4-6 x 1.5-2.2 mm, the firm blades ciUolate with a few longer tapering or shorter gland-tipped setulae, low-venulose on each face. the centric midrib and two intramarginal nerves united by several obliquely ascending secondary venules.
Peduncles 3-7(-9) cm; capitula squatly ovoid or globose, without filaments 12-17 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts firm castaneous, broadly oblanceolate 4-5.5 x 1-2.2 mm, beyond middle setose and stipitate-glandular, pectinately setose-ciUate;y7c»v^r5 4-merous 8-androus, mostly staminate, the few bisexual ones a little longer; calyx membranous campanulate, extemally glabrous, 0.55-1.1 mm, the subtruncate rim delicately few-ciliolate; corolla 5-7 mm, the narrowly funnelform tube glabrous, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 1.1-1.5 mm, distally finely pilosulous or minutely glandular; filaments lavender-pink, monadelphous through ± 1 mm, exserted 14-17 mm.
Pods 1-several per capitulum, firmly attached to receptacle and persistent for nearly a full year, in profile broadly elliptic, apiculate by stout cusp ± 1 mm, 25-40 x 12-16 mm, (3-)4-6-seeded, the replum 3-3.5 mm wide, the fleshy, when ripe stiffly leathery low-convex valves falling entire from replum, this and valves alike densely setose and glandular-setulose overall; seeds unknown.
On rocky stream-banks in cerrado and about rock piles in campo mpestre, 1000-1400 m, colonial and locally plentiful on Chapada dos Veadeiros within ±40 km n. and n.-w. of Alto Paraiso in lat. 13°30'-14°10'S, e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-n. X-III; fr.
Xll-onward.
Among the several potentially arborescent Pachycarpae of candelabriform habit native to Chapada dos Veadeiros M. oedoclada is notable for exceptionally thick branchlets (mostly 6-12 mm diam., whence the epithet), an indumentum composed in part of gland-tipped setulae and consequently clammy foliage, and relatively few and short pinna-pairs.
In many respects it resembles and seems akin to sympatric M. manidea, but differs substantially in these characters: stipules deciduous with associated leaf, the blade usually glabrous within and viscid-glandular without, ordinarily early reflexed; pinnae 8-15 pairs; indumentum of leaf-axes composed of simple setae to 0.2-0.3 mm diam. at base, fine villi, and orange gland-tipped setulae; larger leaflets 4-6 X 1.5-2.2 mm.
By contrast the stipules of M manidea persist a full year after fall of the associated leaf, the erect blades, setose both within and without, forming an imbricated thatch on the annotinous branchlets; pinnae of larger leaves are 18-30 pairs; indumentum of leaf-axes consists of stouter, partly confluent, seemingly branched setae to 2-6 mm long and 0.4-0.7 mm in diam. at base mixed with short claviform but non-excretory setulae; and the larger leaflets are only 2.5-3.5 x 0.8-1.2 mm.
260.
Mimosa dominarum Bameby, sp. nov., inter affines arborescentes pachycaules quibus ab omnibus spiculis interpinnalibus discrepat, his signis eminens: ramorum annotinorum cortex rufus epidermide exfoliante patefactus; pubes viscido-hispida e setis patulis gracilibus rectis auratis 4-5.5 mm usque longis glanduligerisque patulis 1-3 mm longis constans; folia expansa 2-2.5 dm longa, pinnis 17-26-jugis, pinnamm foliolis usque 38-48-jugis, majoribus 4-7 X 1.5 mm; inflorescentia post anthesin foliata elongata 3 dm usque longa.— Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros, caminho para S. Joao da Alian9a, 22.
XII.1968 (fl), Graziela [Barroso] (with M. Jose & Ana) 583. — Holotypus, NY (2 sheets: a) folia matura cum alabastris; b) inflorescentia); isotypus, UB.
M. polydema Harms ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 185 (sphalm. pro polyadena).
1906, nom. nud.—"Ponte Alta, dans le campo, Goyaz [hodie D. F., Glaziou] 27095."-Specimina authent. +B = F Neg. 1425\ K! P! S! Amply leafy unarmed pachycaul rosette-treelets 2-3 m tall, with castaneous annotinous branches to 1 cm diam., the epidermis exfoliating with falling lvs, the axes of homotinous stems, lf-stks and inflorescence densely hispid, viscid and villosulous with fine horizontal lutescent plain setae to 4-5.5 mm, spreading gland-tipped setae 1-3 mm, and minute whitish villi, the facially glabrous lfts thinly villosulousand setulose-ciliolate, the pseudoracemose inflorescence exserted ±2.5-3 dm from lvs but some peduncles subtended by a hysteranthous If that probably greatly surpasses the fruits.
Stipules firm, triangularor lance-acuminate 8-13 x 2-4 mm, castaneous glabrous within, deciduous before the associated If.
Leaf-stalks 16-21 cm, the petiole including hard obese piUvinus 1-3 cm, the longer interpinnal segments ±10-17 mm; a subulate setulose spicule to 3 mm between each pair of pinnae; pinnae (10-)18-26-jug., gently decrescent basipetally, the rachis of longer ones 3.5-7 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 38-48-jug., subequilong except at each end of rachis, the first pair represented by minute paraphyllidia (often concealed by setae), the blades oblong obtuse apiculate, the larger ones ±4-7 x 1-1.6 mm, aU smooth or almost so above, indistinctly 3-nerved beneath.
Peduncles 1-3 per node of inflorescence, 3.5-5.5 cm; capitula globose or plumply ellipsoid, without filaments 14-16 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts oblanceolate acute 4.5-6 x 0.8- 1.5 mm, dorsally from middle upward densely setose and glandular-setulose; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lower ones staminate; calyx 0.6- 0.85 mm, extemally glabrous, the tmncate orifice ciliolate with few minute gland-tipped setulae; coroUa 5.5-7.2 mm, the narrowly funnelform tube glabrous, the ovate acute lobes 1.3-1.5 mm, from middle upward dorsally setulose; filaments pink fading whitish, monadelphous through ±1.5 mm, exserted 16-21 mm; pod unknown.
In cerrado or campo mpestre between 1050 and 1500 m, said to be locally plentiful on Chapada dos Veadeiros between 14° and 14°30'S in e.-centr. Goias, Brazil, and once collected on rio Ponte Alta in the s.-w. comer of Distrito Federal.-Fl. (X-)XI-III. Mimosa dominarum is the only arborescent pachycaul member of its group that has a spicule between each pair of pinnae, and is remarkable in the same context for a vesture of fine long plain setae of a dull yellowish hue mixed with many extremely long-stalked gland-tipped setae and fine white villi.
It differs from habitally similar M. oedoclada and M. manidea in leafstalks about twice as long and in the extended axis of the inflorescence, which rises at early anthesis about 3 dm above the older leaves; and from M. pycnocoma further in relatively long flowers and consequently broad capitula.
261.
Mimosa splendida Bameby, sp. nov., inter Pachycarpas arborescentes pube proUxa ferruginea nuUibi glandulosa, caulibus annotinis (more M. manideae) stipulis maximis subcoriaceis indutis apice foliomm rosulam amplam gerentibus, spiculis inter omnium pinnamm paria, inflorescentiaeque pseudocorymbosae axi subnuUo insignis, ulterius a M. irwinii, notulis plurimis affini, statura arborea, pinnamm longiomm rachi 4-6 (nec 6-9.5) cm longa, foUoUsque suis 14-19 (nec 22-29)-jugis 6-8.5 (nec 9-15) mm usque longis, pedunculis vix 1 (nec 2-3) dm longis, capitulisque globosis (nec ellipsoideis) satis superque diversa. — Brazil.
Goias: pres du passage du rio Couros, dans le campo [±47°40'W, 14°10'S], 17.
L1895 (fl), A F. M. Glaziou 21088.-Holotypus, K = NY Neg. 776^9; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1430, C, F = F Neg. 54858, G, K, LE, M, P, S.-M. pyrrhopila Harms ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 185.
1906, nom. subnud.
Pachycaul treelets 2-3 m, the homotinous branchlets including thatch of coarse persistent stipules ±3 cm diam., each bearing a rosette of ample spreading lvs and a corymbiform pseudoraceme of long-pedunculate globose capitula, the stipules, lf-stks and peduncles clad in dense loose woolly indumentum of extremely fine spreading rusty-orange (in age grayish) setae to ± 6 mm, nowhere glandular, the plane dark brown concolorous lfts lustrous glabrous on both faces, setulose-ciliate.
Stipules coriaceous, broadly lanceolate ± 13 X 4-5 mm, lanate dorsally, glabrous within.
Leaf-stalks 10-22 cm, the short petiole 1.2-3 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 7-10 mm, the shallow ventral groove intermpted between pinna-pairs by a gray-barbellate spicule; pinnae 15-19-jug., strongly decrescent proximally, less so distally, the rachis of longer ones 4-6 cm, the interfoliolar segments 2-3.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 14-19-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the first pair directly next to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades all oblong obtuse from semicordate base, the larger ones 6- 10 X 2-3 mm, 3-3.6 times as long as wide, all smooth veinless above, beneath weakly 3-5- nerved, the midrib subcentric, the inner anterior and inner posterior nerve produced beyond midblade, the outer ones (when present) short and weak.
Peduncles stout 7-11 cm; capitula globose, without filaments 16-17 mm diam., prior to anthesis densely sUky-pUose, the fl-buds concealed by long indumentum of bracts, these linear-elliptic ±3 X 0.7 mm, dorsally from base upward clothed in fine setae to ± 3 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx ±0.5 mm, its subtmncate rim bearing fine erect pappiform setae nearly 3 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped ±6.5 mm, the 1-nerved, shallowly concave lobes ±1.5 x 1.1 mm, finely densely setulose dorsally; filaments pink, monadelphous through nearly 1.5 mm, the longer ones exserted 7 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous (doubtless setose after fertUization); pod unknown.
In campo cerrado or campo mpestre, near or above 1000 m, known only from the type-locality on rio dos Couros, an e. affluent of rio Tocantinzinho flowing s.-w. from Chapada dos Veadeiros in e.-centr. Goias, Brazil.—Fl.
I-II(-?).
This remarkable mimosa was described in Glaziou's Liste as arbuste splendide, haut de 2 a 3 metres, fl blanc rose.
It must be expected to have the candelabriform habit of related species such as M. manidea and M. regina.
The flowering time indicated in the Liste is a mistake, for Glaziou's journey to Chapada dos Veadeiros by way of Formosa was undertaken in January, not in June, 1905.
Despite its arborescent growth form, M. splendida appears most closely related to M. irwinii, which has the same fiery red setose indumentum of the stipules, but is a prostrate shrub with ellipsoid capitula elevated on scapiform peduncles two to three times as long. Special efforts should be made to rediscover this tmly splendid mimosa before its probably very limited habitat is endangered.
262.
Mimosa irwinii Bameby, sp. nov., foliis pedunculisque scapiformibus elongatis in rosulam acaulem confertis stipulisque imbricatis pube ignea nitida barbatis M. speciosissimae manifeste affinis, ab ea his notulis perspicue diversa: folia in apice ramorum ligneomm humifusorum 1 m usque longomm (nec ad xylopodii tabuliformis marginem) conferta; stipulae 3-9 (nec 1-4) mm latae; spicula inter omnia pinnamm paria; foliola majora subduplo longiora 9-15 (nec 5-8) mm longa; calycis OS longe setoso-ciliatus; filamenta longiora 12-16 (nec 9-11) mm corollam superantia; vide etiam diagnosin M. splendidae, habitu arborescenti pachyclado remotioris.—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros, 10 km w. of Alto Paraiso, 24.111.1969, Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 2^957.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, R, S, US. Humifuse rosette-shrub with prostrate woody branches to 1 m bearing a terminal rosettelike cluster of ample lvs and many subvertical scapiform peduncles, these all involved at base in a cone of imbricate stipules silky-pilose extemally with fine straight orange setae to ±10 mm, the scapes and lf-stks mfescently shaggy with attenuate, flexuously recurved or crumpled flagelliform setae to ±5-7 mm, the thick-textured lfts glabrous and lustrous on both faces, scabrousor setose-ciliolate, the massive capitula oblongellipsoid.
Stipules ovateor triangular-acuminate 8-15 X 3.5-9 mm, the firmly coriaceous persistent blades rufous-barbate on both faces but the setae readily deciduous when dry, the ventral face then castaneous-striate.
Leaf-stalks of all but an occasional juvenile If (no further described) 1.5-3 dm, the petiole 30-60 x 1.5-2 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 1.3-3.3 mm; a spicule 1-3 mm between each pinna-pair (sometimes concealed by setae); pinnae 9-16-jug., strongly decrescent proximally and less so distally, the rachis of longer ones (4-)6-9.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2.5-3.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 22-29-jug., a little decrescent toward each end of rachis, the first pair directly next to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all in outline narrowly oblong obtuse or subapiculate, the longer ones 9-15 X 2-3 mm, the margin at maturity callous and pallid but no thicker than the blade itself, the venation almost fully immersed.
Peduncles 2-3 dm; capitula without filaments 1.8-5.5 x 1.2-2 cm; bracts linear-lanceolate or -oblanceolate 6-7 X 0.5-1 mm, dorsally and marginally densely setose;y/ow^r^ 4-merous 8-androus, some proximal ones staminate and a little smaller; calyx campanulate, the membranous tube glabrous but at base with a ring of fine straight setae to ±4 mm, the orifice ciliate with erect pappiform setae to ±2 mm; corolla 6-7 mm, the funnelform tube glabrous, the ovate 1-nerved lobes ±1.5 mm, subappressed-setulose overall, penicillately setose at apex; filaments lavender-pink, monadelphous through 1.1-1.5 mm, exserted 12-16 mm; ovary densely barbate, the glabrous style greatly elongate, surpassing the longest filament by 7-10 mm; pod unknown.
In rocky campo near 1000 m, known only from the type-locality on Chapada dos Veadeiros, near 14°S in e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-R. III-IV(-?).
Ample radical leaves and scapiform peduncles arising from a thatch of imbricate stipules clad in long mfous setae are features common to M. irwinii and M. speciosissima, and suggest a close common precursor.
As shown in the diagnosis, they differ in several significant detaUs.
The year's growth in M. speciosissima starts anew directly from the xylopodium, whereas M. irwinii develops humifuse woody tmnks bearing the rosette of foliage and peduncles at apex.
Compared with those of M. speciosissima the leaves of M. irwinii are more coarsely divided and the leafstalk bears a spicule between each pinna-pair.
While the capitula of M. speciosissima are globose, those of M. irwinii are exceptionally massive, becoming ellipsoid and 2-3 times as long as their diameter.
In another direction M. irwinii may be related to the pachycaul treelet M. splendida, which shares the rufous indumentum and spiculate leaf-stalks that are rare in ser. Pachycarpae.
This, however, is grossly different in lifeform, and in globose capitula that nestle in the rosette of leaves on peduncles less than a third as long. This unique mimosa is dedicated with affection to my friend and former colleague Howard S. Irwin, whose immensely rich and judiciously selected collection of planaltine mimosae has contributed much of what is novel in this revision.
263.
Mimosa speciosissima Taubert, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 21: 431.
1896.—"Habitat in montibus Serra da BaUsa [±47°20'W, 14°S], Ule n. 2828.-Hor. m. Sept. [1892]."-Holotypus, +B; isotypi, HBG! P! = NY Neg. 11813.
M. brachycaulis Harms ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 185.
1906, nom. nud.—"Cabeceiras do rio Gama [hodie Distrito Federal], Glaziou 21041."
- Specimina authent. +B = F Neg. 1398, C! F! = F Neg. 5^577, G! K! M! P! S! Acaulous, subacaulescent or exceptionally shortly caulescent subshrubs with ample multifoliolate radical (subradical) lvs and contemporaneously expanding erect scapiform peduncles arising together from knots on a platform-like woody xylopodium attaining 3 dm diam., at base subtended by a thatch of firm persistent stipules dorsally barbate below middle with fine straight orange-red setae to 6-12 mm, the lf-axes and scapes pilose at anthesis with flexuous or flagelliform, ascending or spreading and ± entangled rufescent setae to 4-7 mm rarely underlain by a coat of minute whitish viUi, nowhere glandular or viscid, the cauline setae deciduous in age beyond their firm thickened pediment, the foliage at early anthesis often immature, the fuUy expanded lfts lustrous brown-olivaceous, glabrous on both faces, scabrousor setose-ciliate, the subglobose capitula ± at level of longer lvs (exceptionally well exserted), the scapes arcuately procumbent or humifuse in fruit.
Stipules erect, loosely imbricate, narrowly lanceolate 6-14 x 1-4 mm, the firm blades glabrescent distally but pectinately setose-ciliate, setose proximally within.
Leaf-stalks of most lvs (7-) 12-30 cm (those of a few exterior lvs sometimes shorter, no further described), the petiole 3-6.5 cm, at middle 0.8-2 mm diam., the interpinnal segments (0.9-) 1.2-3 cm, the shallow ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae commonly (5-)7-14(-16)-, rarely only 2-6-, perhaps exceptionally (ace. to protologue) to 20- jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 4-9(-10.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.2-3 mm; paraphyllidia 0, or exceptionally 1 minute on proximal side of pulvinus; lfts of longer pinnae (22-)25-44(-47)-jug., in outline lance-oblong or oblong from subdilated obtusangulate base, subacute at apex, straight or slightly curved forward, the larger ones (4-)5-8 x 1.3- 2.5 mm, the venation of fully mature blades bluntly prominulous beneath, consisting of subcentric midrib and 2 weak intramarginal primary nerves and often 1-2 shorter ones in posterior angle.
Scapiform compressed peduncles 10-32 cm, the capitulum without filaments (10-) 12-16 mm diam., prior to anthesis either conelike or moriform and setose, the clavate receptacle 3-6 mm; bracts linear-oblanceolate 3.5-5 x 0.6-1 mm, either setulose or long-pilose dorsally;y/ovvers 4-merous 8-androus, a few of the lowest often staminate, the rest bisexual; calyx glabrous extemally 0.5-1 mm, the undulate rim either glabrous or minutely setulose; corolla narrowly turbinate-funnelform (3.8-)4-6 mm, thinly setulose or pilosulous upward from near or beyond middle, the ovate subacute 1-nerved lobes 1-1.5 mm; fUaments piiUc, monadelphous through ±1.5 mm around the pilosulous ovary, exserted 9-11 mm.
Pods usually 3-12 per capitulum, sessile or almost so, in profile oblong-elUptic 25-55 x 9-11 mm, 6-10-seeded, when fertile to apex only minutely bluntly apiculate, constricted only where ovules abort, the replum 1.3-2 mm wide, the fleshy valves low-corrugate over each seed, the black or livid exocarp when dry ±0.4 mm thick in section, sometimes tardily transversely fractured between seeds but the papery, intemally furfuraceous endocarp entire when liberated from replum, the replum and valves aUke coarsely setose overall with incurved, basally dilated, distaUy flageUiform or attenuate setae, the ripe valves recurving from apex but remaining attached to receptacle at base; seeds ovoid or ovoid-ellipsoid 5.5-6 X 2.5-4 mm, the testa smooth mahoganyor chocolate-brown.
In open cerrado or campo sujo subject to fire, and in campo mpestre, 1000-1500 m, of restricted range but locally plentiful on the Brazilian Planalto in lat. 14'*-16°S, apparently bicentric: Chapada dos Veadeiros in e.-centr. Goias; headwaters of rio Parana in Distrito Federal. — Fl. mid-IX-XII, fr.
XII-IV and persistent on dead stems into foUowing year.
This well marked species is ordinarily recognized at sight by its stemless habit, scapose peduncles, and long red vesture of the imbricate stipules, characters shared only by the rare M. irwinii, which differs by spicules between pinnapairs and massive ellipsoid capitula.
Small differences can be seen between groups of populations of M. speciosissima.
On Chapada dos Veadeiros and on Chapada da Contagem in Distrito Federal the pinnae are relatively numerous, in larger leaves commonly 8-16 pairs, and the plant is strictly stemless.
Along streams (Riacho Fundo; Gama; Cabe9a de Veado) flowing into the south arm of Lago do Paranoa in the Federal District the plants vary from tmly acaulescent to shortly acaulescent (peduncles, however, well surpassing developed stem) and the pinnae are often fewer.
A collection (Rosiu 9, NY, UB) from Riacho Fundo contains, however, this gamut of variation: a) at UB, strictly acaulescent, pinnae to 9-jug.; b) at NY, strictly acaulescent, pinnae 2-3-jug, this closely matching Glaziou 21041 from head of rio Gama (=M brachycaulis Harms, ined.); c) at UB, caulescent with one intemode, pinnae (1-)3-jug.; and d) at NY, perhaps abnormal, with five distinct even though short internodes and piimae 5-6-jug. Considered apart from the rest, the first variant (at UB) is morphologically indistinguishable from plants on Chapada da Contagem and further north in Goias.
I find no urgent reason to recognize "M. brachycaulis'^ as taxonomicaUy distinct, but recommend further study in the field.
264.
Mimosa ulei Taubert, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 21: 432.
1896.—Typus infra sub var. ulei indicatur.
Coarse erect, functionally herbaceous wandlike subshrub from xylopodium, attaining 14-20 dm, the usually single, finely striate purplish-castaneous stem ±6-10 mm diam. at base, bearing 2-5 extremely large long-petiolate lvs at nodes not more than 3 dm from ground-level, thence efoliate and passing upward into a simple pseudoraceme or few-branched panicle of distant subglobose capitula, either glabrous throughout except for minutely pubemlent ventral face of pinna-rachises and random gland-tipped or setular trichomes in the inflorescence, or the stems and lf-stks at once pubemlent, thinly yeUow-setulose and viscidulous, the firm lustrous lfts either glabrous or minutely ciliolate.
Stipules at If-bearing nodes deltate or triangular-acuminate ±6- 15 X 5-10 mm, the firm blades striately manynerved glabrous lustrous persistent, those at upper efoliate nodes bracteiform, similar in outline, early reflexed or deciduous.
Leaf-stalks (15-)20- 56 cm, commonly arched backward, the terete or shallowly grooved petiole (5-)8-33 cm, near middle 1.5-4 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 1.5-5 cm; a subulate spicule 1-3.5 mm between each pair of grossly swollen pinna-pulvini; pinnae 4-15(-l 7)-jug., the often backwardly arched rachis of longer ones (4.5-)7-15.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (1-)1.5-10 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 15-40(-48)-jug., a little decrescent toward each end of rachis, the first pair (0.4-) 1-3.5 mm distant from subulate or lanceolate paraphyllidia 0.6-2.5 mm, the blades narrowly oblong or ovate-oblong obtuse or subapiculate, the larger ones (4-)5-26 x 1.3-9.5 mm, all 5-7-nerved from pulvinule, the slightly displaced midrib and inner primary nerves of ampler blades giving rise to several secondary veinlets, the venulation obtusely prominulous beneath, less so or immersed above.
Peduncles 1.5-10 cm; capitula without filaments 10-12.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis either conelike or incipiently moriform; bracts oblanceor obovate-elliptic or spatulate 4-5 x 1-2.5 mm, dorsally shortly stipitate-glandular and sometimes also setulose, the margin either glandular-fimbriolate or ciliolate;flowers4-merous 8-androus, the lower staminate but hardly smaller; calyx 0.4-1 mm, extemally glabrous, the undulate tmncate rim either glabrous or ciliolate with a few tiny plain or gland-tipped setulae; corolla narrowly funnelform-campanulate 4.5-6 mm, the deltate-ovate lobes 1.3-1.7 mm, dorsally either smooth, or minutely glandular, or densely setulose, at tip slightly caUous, delicately 1-nerved; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.7-1.3 mm around base of ovary, exserted 10-13 mm.
Pods (not seen entire, described from weathered annotinous samples) 1-3 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile broadly oblong-eUiptic 35-50 x 10-20 mm, ±6-8(-?)-seeded, at apex contracted into a stout cusp 3-10 mm, the replum 2-2.5 mm wide, the low-convex valves little elevated over seeds, their nigrescent exocarp ±0.4 mm thick in section, traversed by a reticulum of tough fibers, their papery endocarp mfous within, the replum and valves alike setose or glandular-setose overall, the valves when ripe separating entire; seeds not seen.
In a region populated by shrubby and arborescent mimosas of ser. Pachycarpae spectacularly diversified in life-form, M. ulei is itself distinguished primarily by habit: a tall wandlike subshmb with few, exceptionally large, either strictly radical or partly subradical leaves and an effuse, few-branched panicle rising each season about 1.5-2 m from the xylopodium.
Although the whole known range of the species spans no more than about 40 kilometers around the southem foothills of Chapada dos Veadeiros, the material presently available falls into two clear-cut series, different in correlated features of pubescence, leaf-formula, and dimensions of leaflets and pods, series described below as varieties.
The existence of narrowly vicariant sibling taxa in this part of the Goias highlands is exemplified in Mimosa by M. oedoclada-M. manidea and M. densa var. densa—var. alligantina of this account, as well as by Chamaecrista conferta var. simulans—var. machrisiana (Irwin & Bameby, 1978: 196, sub Cassia), of which the type-localities almost exactly coincide with those of M. ulei var. ulei and var. grallator respectively.
Key to varieties of M. ulei I. Stems glabrous; petioles 8-18 cm; longer lfts 6- 26 mm; corolla-lobes glabrous or minutely glandular; pods 15-20 mm wide 264a. var. ulei (p. 425).
1.
Stemsfinelypuberulent and yeUow-setulose; petioles 17-33 cm; longer lfts (4-)5-9.5 mm; corolla-lobes densely setulose extemally; pods 10- 14 mm wide 264b. var. grallator (p. 425).
264a. Mimosa ulei Taubert var. ulei.
M. ulei Taubert, 1896, I.e., sens, str.—"Habitat in campis ad fluvium Rio Preto in ditione Maranhao superioris [± 14°20'S in e.-centr. Goias]: ULEn.
2829."-Holotypus, +B; isotypi, HBG! = NY Neg. 11837, P (Ule 6 in hb. Glaziov.)! Characters as given in key to varieties.
On stony ground in cerrado or campo mpestre near 1000 m, known only from valleys of rio Preto and rio Tocantinzinho at points 10 km s. and 46 km w. of Alto Paraiso, near 14°20'S in e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-Fl.
III-V, IX-X. 264b. Mimosa ulei Taubert var. grallator Barneby, var. nov., a var. ulei caulibus pubemlis et luteo-setulosis (nec glabris), petiolis longioribus 17-33 (nec 8-18) cm longis, foliolis plemmque 5-9.5 (nec 6-26) mm usque longis, coroUae lobulis extus dense setuloso-strigosis (nec glabris vel minutim glandulosis), necnon legumine ut videtur angustiori ±10-14 (nec 15-20) mm lato dissimilis.—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros ±12 km s. of Alto Paraiso, 1000 m, 22.
III.1969 (fl), Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 24880. — Holotypus, UB; isotypi, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. —[M. grallator Bameby, in sched.,
nom. nud.] M. vernicosa sensu Glaziou, 1906: 183, ex parte, quoad no. 21103, caet. exclus.,
non Bentham.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
On stony ridges in campo cerrado transitional to campo mpestre, ± 1000-1200 m, localized at the s. end of Chapada dos Veadeiros on the sources of rio Tocantinzinho, lat. 14°20'-30'S, in e.-centr. Goias, Brazil.—Fl.
III-IV. The epithet grallator, stilt-walker, refers to the exceptionally long petioles of the radical leaves.
265.
Mimosa maguirei Bameby, sp. nov., petiolo communi spiculis interpinnalibus munito ac leguminis valvulis continuis inter Pachycarpas locanda, ibi caulibus elatis glabris atrocastaneis vel glaucescentibus, stipulis caducis, foliomm pinnis dissite 4—11-jugis multifoliolatis, necnon pseudoracemis longe exsertis praestans.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Sa. do Cipo, km 112-118 on road from Hotel Chapeu do Sol, 7.
VIII. 1960 (fl), Bassett Maguire (wfth G. Mendes Magalhaes & C. K. Maguire) 49051.—Holotypus, NY; isotypus, US.—Sa. do Cipo, ± km 112, 18.n.l968 (fr), Irwin & al. 20450.-Varatypi, K, LE, NY, R, RB, UB, US. Unarmed, openly few-branched, sparsely but amply leafy subshrubs and shrubs attaining 1.5- 5 m, appearing glabrous below the yellowishsetulose capitula and the sometimes remotely hispidulous inflorescence-axes, but the pinnapulvini densely appressed-setulose and the pinna-rachises minutely pubemlent, the lustrous thick-textured lfts sometimes remotely randomly ciliolate with plain or gland-tipped setulae, the smooth terete purplish or blackish-livid homotinous stems often glaucescent in age, the inflorescence a loose pseudoraceme or panicle of pseudoracemes rising ±3-5 dm above foliage.
Stipules at base of petioles, even on young flowering stems, either prematurely caducous or perhaps obsolete, those subtending peduncles lanceolate 4-6 mm, glabrous dorsally, setose-ciliate, also precociously deciduous.
Leaf-stalks of primary cauline lvs (some diminished distal lvs no further described) 10-28 cm, the pulvinus early separated from stem by a deeply engraved sulcus, the subterete petiole 4.5-12 cm, at middle 1.5- 2 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 2- 5.5 mm; between each pinna-pair a (sometimes deciduous) spicule 0.7-1.5 mm; pinnae (3-)4- 11-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 5-10 cm, the interfoliolar segments l-2(-2.5) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 40-65-jug., the first pair 1.5-3 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia, all in outline narrowly oblong obtuse or subapiculate, longer ones 4-9 X 1.5-2.7 mm, all veinless above, weakly 3-nerved beneath, the centric midrib weakly 1-2-pinnate beyond middle.
Peduncles solitary or commonly 2- 3 per node, 1.5-4 cm; capitula squatly ellipsoid or globose, prior to anthesis conelike, without filaments 11-12 mm diam.; bracts spatulate-oblanceolate 3.6-4.2 X 0.8-1.2 mm, yellowish-setulose-ciliate from near middle upward, toward apex thinly setulose and glandular dorsally; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the lowest staminate but scarcely shorter than the rest; calyx-tube shallowly campanulate glabrous 0.3-0.5 mm, the cilia of its crenulate rim to ±1-1.3 mm; corolla funnelform 3.7-5 mm, the tube glabrous, the ovate acute or obtuse membranous 1-nerved lobes 1.4-1.8 mm, neither callous nor much concave distally, dorsally thinly setulose or capitateglandular, rarely glabrous; filaments pink, shortly monadelphous below the glabrous ovary, exserted 10-12 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, sessile, in profile 20-40 x 7.5-9.5 mm, ±6-9-seeded, at obtuse apex abmptly cuspidate by thick style-base 1.5-5 mm, the replum ±1.5 mm wide, the stiffly papery lugrescent valves ±0.5 mm thick in section, extemally either quite glabrous or thinly capitate-glandular (but not setose), internally rufous-furfuraceous, low-cormgate over the transverse seeds, falling from replum entire; seeds ±4-4.7 X 3-3.3 mm, the testa atro-castaneous smooth.
On sandstone terraces, rock-piles and outcrops, 1150-1300 m, localized on and near the crest of Sa. do Espinhafo in mun. Diamantina (near 18°15'S) and on Sa. do Cip6 in mun. Jaboticatubas and Sta. Ana do Riacho (near 19°20'S) in centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.-Fl.
VIII-X, fr.
XI-II. Mimosa maguirei is readUy distinguished from other Pachycarpae of Sa. do Espinha90 by stature, smooth livid, ultimately glaucescent stems, relatively few and distant multifoliolate pinnae, and virgate efoliate pseudoracemes far exserted above the leaves.
The populations near Diamantina (at Biribiri and west and northwest of the city) appear to have slightly more numerous pairs of pinnae than those of Sa. do Cipo, but I can find no convincing evidence of racial differentiation.
What appears to be historically the first collection of M. maguirei is Glaziou 19127 (C! P! K!), in Glaziou's Liste (1906: 183) miscited 29127 and misidentified as M. vernicosa.
On Sa. do Cipo M. maguirei is sometimes parasitized by Pilostyles (A. P. Duarte 5692, RB).
265bis.
Mimosa sp. [Glaziou 19125, K. —Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Sertao; arbuste, fl. roses.
OctNov].
M. melanocarpa sensM Glaziou, 1906: 182.
Glandular and finely setose, like vars. of M. foliolosa subsp. pachycarpa.
Leaf-stalks only 5- 7 cm, lacking interpinnal spicules; pinnae to 10- jug., the rachis only 1.5-2 cm; lfts 20-30-jug., to 3 X 1 mm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam.; calyx including setulose cilia of orifice 0.7- 1.2 mm; corolla 3 mm, the lobes setose and glandular-setulose.
This specimen, not matched among modem collections, differs from M. melanocarpa, to which it was referred by Glaziou, in much smaUer leaves, shorter pinnae, smaller capitula, and extemally glabrous calyx-tube.
It differs from M. setosa subsp. setosa in all the same characters except the calyx; and from both in lack of interpinnal spicules.
This last character suggests ser. Pachycarpae, of which it may prove to be a reduced, smaU-flowered member.
The fruit is needed to indicate affinity.
265ter.
Mimosa sp. [Irwin & Soderstrom 6016, UB (unicate).—Brazil.
Distrito Federal: ±35 km s.-w. of BrasUia on road to Anapolis, 700— 1000 m, 5.
IX.1964(fr)].
Erect from xylopodium ±7 dm, the slender stem and lf-stks strigose with subappressed-ascending setae ±1-2 mm, the small thick lustrous lfts glabrous facially, minutely ciliolate, the capitula (fr) axillary to 2-3 distal lvs; stipules 3-6 X 0.6-1 mm; lf-formula xii-xv/14-16, the espiculate lf-stk 6-8.5 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 15-18 mm, the oblong-elUptic lfts to 2 x 0.8 mm, coarsely 3-nerved beneath; peduncles ±2.5 cm; flowers not seen; pod 3>5-40 x 9-10 mm, the replum ±1.3 mm wide, the valves falling entire from replum, extemally minutely villosulous and strigose with spaced, comma-shaped, narrowly ascending setae to ± 1 mm, eglandular; seeds 8- 11.
The foregoing description is taken from a single stem collected at end of the dry season.
The plants, said to be locally common, grew with M. accedens, similar in proportionately long leafstalks and short pinnae, but very different in longsetose stems and in stipitate, lustrous-vemicose and viscid-setulose craspedia.
The pod is almost that of M. foliolosa var. foederalis, but the abbreviated pinnae and tiny leaflets seem to stand outside the known range of variation in this variety.
Matching specimens in flower are needed.
D(iii).
Series HABBASIA Mimosa sect. Habbasia DeCandolle ser. Habbasia.
Mimosa sect. Habbasia DeCandolle, 1825, 1826, I.e., sens, str.—Sp. lectotypica: M. polyacantha Willdenow = M. habbas Delile = M. pellita Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Asperatae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 399.
1842, ex parte, quoad spp. eglandulosas magnispiculatas.—Sp. lectotypica: M. asperata Linnaeus.—M ser Asperatae subdivisio Asperatae verae Bentham, 1875: 437, caeteris exclusis; 1876: 378, quoad spp. 174-175, 182-185.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Dormientes Bentham, J. Bot. (Hook.) 4: 402.
1840.—Sp. lectotypica: M. dormiens Humboldt & Bonpland ex WiUdenow.—Reduced by Bentham, 1875: 435 to a subdivision of ser. Asperatae.
M. XIV. Strigillosae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.
23(3): 145.
1928, nom. nud. M. XXX.
Dormientes Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 146.
1928, nom. nud. M. XXXII.
PigraeBrittQn & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 146.
1928, nom. nud. Microphyllidious, arborescent and sarmentose shrubs, free-standing shrubs, and pereimial or (M. dormiens) monocarpic herbs, armed on internodes and often on interpinnal segments of lfstks with either straight or recurved aculei, these sometimes randomly wanting.
Indumentum of minute villi (rarely wanting) and either appressed or spreading-ascending, tapering or flagelliform, basifixed or exceptionally (M. orinocoensis) basally calcarate setae, eglandular.
Stipules herbaceous or chartaceous, mostly ovate or lanceolate or ligulate and striately 5-50-nerved, in M. pellita the venation immersed, in M. strigillosa the blades dilated, ovate or semicircular.
Leaf-formula i-xvii/IO-48; interpinnal spicules (1-)1.5- 17(-23) mm, or (M. strigillosa only) lacking; larger lfts 4-10(-12) x 0.5-2.5 mm, subparallelnerved, at least the inner posterior and one anterior nerve produced quite or almost to blade apex.
Inflorescence either axillary from the first or pseudoracemose, the fls mostly capitulate, in M. miranda spicate, the capitula in praefloration moriform except in M. dormiens; calyx either campanulate subtruncate or distinctly lobed, the lobes either setiform or subpaleaceous, the whole calyx of M. dormiens subobsolete;y7ow^r5 4-merous diplostemonous, random fls in some heads 5-merous; corolla 1.3-3.5(-4.2) mm, the lobes 1 -nerved; filaments free or united into an obscure stemonozone not over 0.5 mm, but in M. strigillosa monadelphous through 0.5-2 mm.
Pod a craspedium, either sessile or stipitate, commonly in profile linear or broad-linear, 9-17 mm wide and 6-20-seeded, but in Mm. dormiens and strigillosa oblong or obovate 5-8 mm wide and 2 - 5-seeded, the replum 0.2-1.2 mm wide, the freefalling articles either individually indehiscent or rarely dehiscent.
Spp. 10, of wet or temporarily wet, mostly lowland, tropical and warm temperate climates, widespread in the Americas from the Gulf lowlands in United States, West Indies, and s. Sinaloa to Paraguay, n. Argentina and Uruguay, one (M. pellita) diffused over tropical Africa and Madagascar, and naturalized elsewhere in the paleotropics.
The nucleus, and much of the mass, of ser. Habbasia consists of the immediate relatives of M. pellita, shmbby eglandular mimosas with pluripinnate leaves, conspicuously developed interpinnal spicules, capitellate flowers, and broad pluriovulate craspedia, a group nearly extensive with the Asperatae v^ra^ ofBentham (1875:437).
These species are morphologically very similar except for M. weddelliana, which differs from the rest in conjugate-pinnate leaves.
Analysis of the broadly drawn M. asperata of Bentham shows that it comprises in reality several distinct microspecies, but has expanded the definition of the series only insofar as to admit the calcarate setae of M. orinocoensis.
The recent discovery of the remarkable M. miranda, which has essentially the foliage and armature of M. pellita but flowers arranged in loose tassels, has necessarily stretched the classical definition of the group.
To this irreducible nucleus of Asperatae verae I here add, with misgiving, two aberrant types that Bentham placed side-by-side in a subdivision Dormientes of ser. Asperatae.
This pair, M. dormiens and M. strigillosa, differ together from other members of ser. Habbasia in herbaceous life-form and much smaller, few-ovulate, mostly 2-5-seeded pods.
The relationship of monocarpic M. dormiens to the core of ser. Habbasia is expressed in strigose indumentum and in conspicuously spiculate and aculeate leaf-stalks.
Mimosa strigillosa, which seemingly akin to the last, is nevertheless peculiar for scanty armament, humifuse bifacial stems, and basally monadelphous stamens.
These two species remain morphologically isolated in ser. Habbasia, M. strigillosa especially so, and each could logically be referred to a monotypic series.
Their general affinity to ser. Habbasia, Somniantes and Neptunioideae is, however, not in doubt.
In the pages that follow I adopt, for the group of species collectively referred in modem literature to M. pigra, the nomenclature that I proposed in tentative form in 1989 (Bameby, 1989: 137-142).
This paper, circulated in manuscript in 1987, has elicited from B. Verdcourt (K) a proposal (Taxon 38: 522, 523.
1989) to conserve the name M. pigra in the sense used by authors of major and modem African and Asiatic floras, an exercise in preventive medicine designed to circumvent the law of priority.
I have great sympathy for the cause of nomenclatural stability and suffer a pang of regret whenever a familiar name is found to be illegitimate or incorrectly applied.
I have, however, lived long enough to see radical changes (e.g., the case of the Douglas fir) quickly absorbed into the literature and, however painful when first applied, become standard usage within a generation.
The notion of a body of Rules which may be applied selectively, in the name of convenience, has little appeal to me, though this is now a feature of the Berlin code.
Incidentally, I must protest Verdcourt's selection of a specimen (Barbosa & Lemos 7999) from Mozambique as lectotype of a primarily American species.
If lectotypification in Verdcourt's sense is required, an American specimen would seem more appropriate.
If the proposal to conserve M. pigra in the sense of M. pellita of this revision is successful, a new name will be required for M. vellosiella sensu Burkart.
Conspectus of ser. Habbasia Mimosa * Shrubby or arborescent; fls capiteUate; pod broad-linear 8-24-seeded; pinnae at least 4-jug.; filaments free or almost so.
266. pellita Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow a. var. pellita b. var. dehiscens Bameby c. var. hispida (Willdenow) Bameby 267. tarda Bameby 268. orinocoensis Bameby 269. asperata Linnaeus 270. elliptica Bentham 271. /7/^ra Linnaeus ** Like * except for spicate fls; pod unknown.
272. miranda Bameby *** Like *, but pinnae 1 -jug.
273. weddelliana Bentham **** Herbaceous erect monocarpic; pod 2(-3)-seeded; lf-stks spiculate like all the preceding, but capitula prior to anthesis conelike.
274. dormiens Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow ***** Herbaceous humifuse perennial; pod l-4(-5)-seeded; lf-stks espiculate; filaments monadelphous at base; capitula prior to anthesis moriform.
275. strigillosa Torrey & Gray Key to species of ser. Habbasia 1.
Fls capitellate, the capitula globose, ellipsoid, or densely short-cylindric, the axis of receptacle less than 15 (in M. strigillosa to 22) mm long. 2.
Stems herbaceous, pliantly humifuse and bluntly bifacial, often adventitiously rooting from nodes; capitula ellipsoid or short-cylindric, without filaments 1.5-3 times as long as diam.; of bicentric dispersal: s.-e. United States and n.-e. Mexico, Paraguay to n. Argentina and Uruguay; largely extratropical 275.
M. strigillosa (p. 445).
2.
Stems either woody or herbaceous, but if herbaceous not compressed, if at once herbaceous and diffiise not radicant, and the capitula subglobose.
3.
Pinnae of larger lvs 4-16-jug.; pod sessile or shortly stipitate, the stipe not over 7 mm.
4.
Shrubs and treelets with persistent woody trunks; capitula without filaments 5.5-9 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; corolla 2.2-3 mm; pod broad-linear 40-130 x (5_)6-15 mm, 8- 24-seeded.
5.
Stipules firm, densely appressed-setose dorsally and imperceptibly venose extemally or, if visibly venose above middle, the nerves 5 or less; extremely common and widespread from tropical Mexico and Cuba s. to n. Peru and n.-e. Argentina; paleotropics 266.
M. pellita (p. 430).
5.
Stipules chartaceous, striately 6-15-nerved dorsally, commonly glabrous but if setulose the indumentum not concealing the venation.
6.
Setae of stems laterally affixed above base, with a short blunt descending arm; calyx 0.3-0.6 mm, the rim undulate or obscurely pallid-lobulate; lf-formula ix-xvi/(25-)30- 48; aculei of stems and lf-stks all recurved; body of pod 7-10 x 1.3-1.6 cm, 12-18 seeded, the articles 4.5-8 mm long, indehiscent, the interseminal septa 0.6-1 mm wide, the valves hispid with vertical setae 1.5-4.5 mm; Orinoco basin in Venezuela and lower Amazon valley in Para, Brazil; n. Colombia 268.
M. orinocoensis (p. 436).
6.
Setae of stems asymmetrically basifixed, not spurred; calyx 0.6-2 mm, at least 0.7 mm if lf-formula as above; aculei and details of pod variable.
7.
Lf-formula x-xviii/30-46; pod when well fertilized 14-24-seeded, the articles individually dehiscent and the seed falling naked; Central America s. interruptedly to Bolivia, adapted to permanent high humidity 267.
M. tarda (p. 436).
7.
Lf-formula iv-viii(-ix)/20-40; pod when well fertilized 6-14(-15)-seeded, the articles free-falling indehiscent, sealed at each end by the unruptured septum; either of Texas to Central America and Cuba, or of s.-e. Brazil, Paraguay and Argentina, adapted to an annual dry season, or to warm-temperate climate, or to both.
8.
Aculei of stems and lf-stks alike perpendicular, straight, broad-based, and early blanched; corolla strigulose distally; articles of pod 4-7.5 mm long; s. Texas to Nicaragua, tropical w. Mexico, and Cuba 269.
M. asperata (p. 437).
8.
Aculei of stems recurved or at least distally declined, and brownish except at pallid base, those of lf-stks varying from straight to recurved but also brownish.
9.
CoroUa glabrous or almost so; longer filaments exserted 5-8 mm; articles of pod 3-4.5 mm long; coastal s. Brazil, s.-ward from s. Bahia 270.
M. elliptica (p. 439).
9.
Corolla strigulose distally; longer filaments exserted ±2 mm; articles of pod 5-10 mm long; riparian within the Paraguai basin in Paraguay and Argentina.
271.
M. pigra (p. 440).
4.
Monocarpic herbs (sometimes in age basally lignescent); capitula without filaments 3.5-4.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; corolla less than 2 mm; pod in profile asymmetrically obovate-cuneate 7-11 x 6-8 mm, (1-)2(-3)-seeded; Amazonian Brazil n. to s. Mexico. ... 274.
M. dormiens (p. 443).
3.
Pinnae 1-jug.; pod contracted at base into a stipe 12-28 mm; middle Paraguai basin in Paraguay, adj. Brazil, and s.-e. BoUvia, disjunct in middle S. Francisco vaUey, Bahia, BrazU 273.
M. weddelliana (p. 441).
1.
Rs spicate, the floral axis 3 ^ cm long; Atlantic s. Bahia 272.
M. miranda (p. 441).
266.
Mimosa pellita Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1037.
1805.-Typus infra sub var. pellita indicatur.
Armed shrubs with ample microphyllidious sensitive lvs, usually of bushy roundor flattopped outline, maturing at 1-3 m but potentially attaining 5 m with tmnk 1 dm diam. and, not infrequently, when crowded at gallery-margin, sarmentose-scandent, exceptionally diffuse and trailing, variable in pubescence and armature, the stems, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence either strigose or hispid with forwardly appressed, ascending, or widely spreading, pallid or lutescent scabemlous setae to 1-3(-3.5) mm commonly mixed with minute puberulence, the stems and commonly also the dorsal or lateral ribs of lf-stks erratically armed with straight declined or with decurved or hooked, hornlike or broad-based aculei to 1.5-12 mm, the cauline aculei either infrastipular or intemodal, those of lf-stks either solitary or opposite on interpinnal segments, but either or both absent from some branches (or from some lvs of a branch), the many crowded olivaceous lfts subconcolorous brunnescent, either finely strigulose, finely villosulous, or glabrous except for margins at least remotely setulose-ciliolate, the globose or ellipsoid capitula solitary or 2-3(-4) together in the axil of synchronously developing or hysteranthous lvs, often at first forming a shortly exserted pseudoraceme but quickly becoming axillary and immersed in foliage, the fmits (or empty repla) long persisting on annotinous branchlets and new fls often coeval with newly ripened pods.
Stipules firm, ovate or lanceolate, ±2-5(-6) x 1-2 mm, extemaUy densely silky-strigose, glabrous castaneous within, usually not visibly nerved extemally and if so only distally and then not over 5-nerved, the blades becoming dry and brittle but normally persistent.
Leaf-stalks of fuUy grown lvs (4-)6-20(-24) cm, the petiole including discolored pulvinus 3-16(-20) x 0.8-2.4 mm, the interpinnal segments 6-20(-22) mm, shallowly sulcate both ventrally and laterally, the ventral groove bridged and charged between pinna-pairs with a stiffly ascending, stramineous or brownish, glabrous or basally puberulent spicule (0.5-)1.5-14(-23)mm;pz>z«a^(6-)8-14(-16)-jug., either subequilong or proximally decrescent, the rachis of longer ones (2-)3-7(-8) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments mostly 0.6-1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 25^4(-48)-jug., decrescent only at very ends of rachis, the first pair less than 1 mm distant from minute conic or subulate paraphyllidia, the blades linear from obtusangulate or shallowly blunt-auriculate base, acute or apiculate, those near mid-rachis 5-12 x 0.6-1.7(-2) mm, (5-)5.5-9(-10) times as long as wide, all smooth veinless above, beneath 4-5-nerved, the subcentric midrib and parallel lateral nerves all finely prominulous.
Peduncles 1.5-7(-8) cm; capitula without filaments 8-12 x 6-9 mm, usually moriform prior to anthesis but bracts sometimes as long as the obtuse, scabrous-setulose fl-buds; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1-3.6 x 0.2-0.5 mm, 1- or 3-nerved, beyond middle either setulose, pubemlent or glabrous dorsally, always setuloseciliolate; flowers with paleaceous calyces, consisting of shallow brown campanulate cups 0.3- 0.6 mm tall surmounted by four (sometimes unequal, asymmetric) lobes setose-decompound to variable depth, the whole 1-1.8 mm long; corolla 4(-5)-merous diplostemonous, narrowly turbinate, the ovate 1- or partly 2(-3)-nerved lobes 0.8-1.3 X 0.6-0.95 mm; filaments pale pink or lilac fading whitish, sometimes whitish from the first, united at base into a stemonozone ±0.5 mm, exserted 1.5-5 mm.
Pods solitary or commonly 2-several, occasionally to 18 per capitulum, in profile linear or broad-linear, straight or slightly curved, 4-12(-13) x (0.6-)0.7-1.5 cm, abmptly contracted at base into a stout stipe 1- 5(-7) mm, broadly rounded and abmptly cuspidulate at apex, either piano-compressed or compressed but turgid, the replum 0.6-1.2 mm wide, the brownish-green, reddish-brown or livid, either thinly or stiffly chartaceous valves either setose with erect, variably broad-based and variably crowded or distant setae to 2^.5(-6) mm and sometimes in addition minutely pubemlent, less commonly shortly and sparely strigose with finer tapering, forwardly ascending or appressed setae to ±2 mm, when ripe breaking into 14-21 (-24) or exceptionally only 8-13 (or by abortion of ovules fewer) free-faUing articles, those near mid-pod 2.5-4.5 mm long (hence ± 2 - 4 times broader than long), that at each end of pod longer, all either individually indehiscent, closed at each end by a septum 0.2-2 mm wide, or dehiscent and not or only very narrowly membranous-septate, the seeds consequently shed, as the case may be, either encapsulated (when readily water-bome) or naked (when instantly submersible); seeds transverse, narrowly compressed-oblong-ellipsoid ±4.5-6 X 2-2.6 mm, the smooth testa olivaceous or brown-olivaceous dull.
Mimosa pellita, as described above, is equivalent in essence, though not in all details, to M. asperata of Bentham's revision (1875: 437) and to M. pigra of most modem floras, but appears here under an unfamiliar name.
Study of the types of the two Linnaean names that have prevailed in the literature has shown (Bameby, 1989) that neither can be applied, sensu stricto, to this commonest of all shmbby mimosas, but that each properly belongs to a close relative of relatively narrow range, M. pigra to the species that has passed in Argentina as M. vellosiella Herter, and M. asperata to the northem segregate M. berlandieri.
Only by combining all these into one polymorphic taxonomic artifact could M. pigra, historically the oldest name for any member of the group, be preserved in the sense of recent authors.
Even when the peripheral microspecies M. asperata (=M. berlandieri), M. elliptica Benth. and M. pigra (sens, str.) are isolated, the residue of Bentham's "Asperatae verae" presents an initially dismaying array of variation in pubescence, in armature, in dimensions and form of stipules and fmits, and in other characters.
Analysis reveals, however, that all is not random or chaotic, but on the contrary subject to order and related to dispersal.
Close attention to attachment of cauline setae, to form and venation of stipules and floral bracts, to dehiscence of the fruit and release of the seeds has revealed unsuspected specific and varietal entities described herein as M. orinocoensis, M. tarda, and M. pellita vars. dehiscens and hispida, the last described at the same time as M. pellita itself but never correctly characterized.
Pruned of these discordant elements, M. pellita yet remains the most widely dispersed shmbby mimosa, extending autochthonously in typical form from tropical lowland Mexico to northeastern Argentina, over much of Antillea, over most of tropical Africa, and as a colonist further afield in Malesia and Australia.
Within its immediate group M. pellita is recognized by small, firm, dorsally silky-strigose stipules usually not perceptibly venulose, or if weakly so, with major nerves five or less in number.
The pod takes two forms.
In one the individual one-seeded articles fall from the replum indehisced, sealed at each end by a persistent septum of variable width; in the other each article dehisces independently into free-falling panels.
In the first case each seed is dispersed in a buoyant envelope and can be bome on water far from the parent plant; in the second it is shed naked, to sink directly into mud or water.
Pods of the first type tend to be tumid when ripe and densely hispid with stiff crowded perpendicular setae, whereas those of the second type are planocompressed and more weakly pilose or strigose with more scattered, ascending or subappressed setae, the difference often, but not invariably, becoming evident before maturation of the fruit.
The dehiscent type, which closely simulates related M. tarda, is dispersed in a broad crescent around the southem periphery of the Amazon basin, sometimes associated with the indehiscent type.
It is not known to occur in North America or in the Old World, but it may be cryptically present, for plants collected in flower only cannot be distinguished.
A variant local in northem Venezuela notable for narrow pod and small, proportionately broad seeds may be recognized as var. hispida.
Key to varieties of M. pellita 1.
Pods 8-15 mm wide; seeds narrowly ellipsoid 4.5-6 mm; range of the species.
2.
Mature pod septate between seeds, the articles faUing from replum indehisced, sealed at each end by a membrane 0.2-2 mm wide; ripe pod compressed but tumid, the valves densely hispid with 1. straight vertical or proximally erect distally incurved setae; range of the species 266a. var. pellita (p. 432).
2.
Mature pod eseptate, or the septa tenuously membranous and very narrow, easily torn, the articles each individually dehiscent and the seeds free-falling; ripe pod piano-compressed except where coUiculate over seeds, weakly hirsute with relatively soft, narrowly ascending or subappressed setae; tropical S. America around and beyond the s. edge of the Amazonian Hylaea in BrazU, e. BoUvia and Paraguay, in Brazil occupying a crescentic range of dispersal suspended between Acre and Bahia.
266b. var. dehiscens (p. 433).
Pods 6-7 mm wide; seeds lentiform ±3-3.7 mm long; local in n. Venezuela.
.
266c. var. hispida (p. 433).
266a. Mimosa pellita Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. pellita.
M. pellita Willdenow, 1805, I.e., sens, str.—^^Habitat Cumanae [edo.
Sucre, Venezuela] ad nvc>5."
—Holotypus, B-WILLD [2 sheets, 19081 (fl) & 19082 (fr)] seen in microform!; isotypus, labelled "90.
Cumana," P-HBK!—M. pellita Kunth, Mimoses 27, t. 9.
1819-1820, descr. ampliat.-Equated by Bentham, 1875: 438, with M. asperata.— Caaeo sp. # 2 (silva d'agoa) Marcgrave, Hist, nat. Bras.
2: 74 + fig. on p. 75 (pod).
1648.
M. longisiliqua Lamarck, Encycl.
1:21.
1783, ex parte (fruct.), based on M. spinosa secunda etc.
Breyne, Exot. pi. cent. 1: t. 17.
1678, exclus. lectotypo qui = M. diplotricha C. Wright-Cf Bentham, 1875: 436.
M. polyacantha WiUdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1034.
1805, based on Ergett et Krone Bmce, Select spec. nat. hist. 35 + fig. 1790, this account being the typus!—Observed and drawn by James Bruce in Abyssinia. —M. habbas Delile, Descr.
Egypte, Hist. nat. HI.
1813, nom. superfl. (included typus of M polyacantha).—Eqyxated with M. asperata by Bentham, 1875: 438.
M. canescens Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1038.
1806.- ""Habitat in Guinea .
.
.
75er^. "
— Holotypus, B-WILLD 19083, seen in microform!—Equated with M. asperata by Bentham, 1875: 438.
M. ciliata Willdenow, Enum. pi. 1048.
IS09.-''Habitat in Brasilia [presumably Para, F. W. Sieber, commun.] Comes de Hoffmannsegg."
—Holotypus, B-WILLD 19074, seen in microform!—Equated with M. asperata by Bentham, 1875: 438.
M. sicaria Hoffmannsegg, Verz.
Pfl.-Kult.
221.
1824, e descr.—"Hab. in Bras[ilia]."—Perhaps the same as the preceding.—Equated tentatively by DeCandolle, Mem. Leg. 7: 428.
1826, and unequivocally by Bentham, 1875: 438 with M. asperata.—Poeppig 2781 from Ega, Amazonas, Brazil is so named (W).
M. procumbens Schumacher, Beskr.
Guin. pi. 324.
1827 [=Kongel.
Danske Vidensk.
Selsk.
Naturvidensk.
Math.
Afti.
4: 99.
1829].-"... a Naerhaden af Christiansborg [=Accra, Ghana, Thonning].''—No typus seen; equated with M. asperata by Bentham, 1875: 438. [M. bellatrix Hoffmannsegg ex Steudel, Nomencl. bot. ed. 2, 147.
1841, nom. nud.] M. cinerea (?) var. pubescens Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 383.
1876.—".. . inter Conceigao et Natividade provinciae Goyaz: Burchell, n. 8247."
— Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1901; isotypus, GH!—M asperata fma pubescens (Bentham) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 17.
1910.
M. vellosiella var. pubescens (Bentham) Burkart, Darwiniana 8: 96.
1948, quoad nom. M. asperata fma inermis Lindman, Bih.
Kongl.
Svenska Vetensk.-Akad.
Handl.
24, Afd.
3(7): 48, in nota.
1898.-"e ripa fluvU Paraguay. .. ^.2075."-Holotypus, labelled "in ripa fluvii Riacho Mbopi," ll.
IX.1893(fl, fr), S! M. asperata var. genuina Hassler fma aspera Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 15.
1910.-"Paraguay: In palude pr. Caraguatay .
.
.
Hassler 3428."
— Holotypus, G!; isotypus, K! M. asperata var. genuina Hassler fma mollis Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 15.
1910.-"[Paraguay.] Gran Chaco:... ad ripam occidentalem fluminis Paraguay (Chaco septentr.) . .. Hassler no. 2861, leg. Rojas."
-Holotypus G!; isotypi.
A! K! NY! W! M. asperata var. intermedia Hassler + fma armata Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9:16.
1910.— "Paraguay: ad flumen luqueri . .. Hassler no. 623; .
.
. pr. San Bernardino .. .
Hassler no. 546 et no. 1982."—Lectotypus, Hassler 1982, G!; syntypi, Hassler 546, 623, G! K! M. asperata var. intermedia Hassler fma inermis Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 16.
1910.- "Paraguay: .. . pr. Bella Vista in regione fluminis Apa. .. Hassler no. 8149."—Holotypus, G!; isotypi, A! K! W! M. asperata var. cinerea (Vellozo) ? fma longepedunculata Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 18.
1910.—"[Paraguay.] Gran Chaco: .
.
. ad ripam occidentalem fluminis Paraguay (Chaco septentr.). .. Hassler no. 2369."-Holotypus, G!; isotypi, K! W! M. asperata var. cinerea fma glabrescens Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni 9: 18.
1910.-"[Paraguay.] Gran Chaco: Ad ripam occidentalem fluminis Paraguay (Chaco septentr.) .
.
.
Hassler no. 2809."
— Holotypus, G! (?) M. asperata var. vermoesenii DeWildeman, PI. bequaert.
3: 71.
1925.—"[Belgian Congo.] Kwamouth, 9 juin 1919 (F. Vermoesen, n. 2398)."-No typus seen; found with the typical variety and said to differ in short, more appressed setae of pod, this suggesting M. pellita var. dehiscens.
M. asperatavar. scandensDucke, Bol. Teen.
Inst.
Agron.
N. 2: 8.
1944.—"... prope Tonantins (in civitate Amazonas) frequens, 28.1.1944, Ducke 1609; prope Obidos (in civitate Para), Ducke Herb. Amaz.
Mus. Para 15703 et 15882."-Isosyntypi, Ducke 1609, NY! R! US!-The syntypus Ducke 15882 at RB, hastily examined, may represent M. orinocoensis.
M. asperata sensu Bentham, 1875:437, max. pro parte. exclus. syn. nonnuU.; auct. plur. ultra annum 1900, inclus.
Robinson.,
1898: 331; non Linnaeus.
M. pigra sensu auct. omn. recentior.,
max pro parte; non Linnaeus; Lewis, 1987, pi. 8E, fig. 8U; Burkart, 1987: 493, fig. 219.
Variable in stature, pubescence and armature, the cauline setae forwardly appressed, ascending, spreading or, when long and fine, loosely retrorse, the cauline aculei recurved at least at tip, those of lf-stks varying from almost straight to sharply recurved (especially in plants of sarmentose habit) but sometimes lacking in some, rarely in all lvs, or present on a few proximal interpinnal segments and lacking distaUy; stipules usually veinless extemally, the tips sometimes glabrescent and perceptibly, rarely strongly 1-5-nerved but the blades always densely strigose at least to middle, commonly overall; pods as described in key to varieties.
On stream barUcs and seasonaUy flooded shores, along ditches and in seasonally wet savanna or scrub-savanna habitats, sometimes a pest of irrigated land, assuming a bushy form when solitary or in pure stands but (especially in tropical S. America) when crowded in gallery forest becoming sarmentose or scandent, from near sea level to ±1000 m and in Colombia attaining 1600 m, common and locally abundant nearly throughout the lowland American tropics and warm-temperate e. S. America: in Mexico and Central America on both the Pacific and Atlantic slopes from s. Sinaloa and s. Veracruz s.-e. to Panama; common on Cuba (Bassler, 1985, Karte 1, sub M. pigra); introduced of old on Jamaica and in recent times on Puerto Rico, absent from Hispaniola; Lesser Antilles s.-ward from Guadeloupe; in South America on Pacific lowlands from n.-w. Colombia s. to ±8°S in n.-w. Pem, e. through interior Colombia and Venezuela to the Guianas, scattered along principal rivers of Amazonian Brazil, thence e. and s., partly sympatric with var. dehiscens, to coastal Rio de Janeiro, extending s. of the tropic line to coastal Sta. Catarina, w. Parana and Paraguay, and s.- ward through n.-e. Argentina (Formosa, Chaco, Corrientes, Misiones, Entre Rios), attaining 35°S in the delta of rio Parana.
In the Old World tropics native over much of lowland tropical Africa (Brenan, 1959: 43, fig. 13), on Madagascar, and introduced in iawa.—Amourette, zamourette (French AntUles); bambuco, espina de vaca, trupilla, zarza (Colombia); pingahuisacha, uha-degato (Pem); araha-de-gato negro (Venezuela);jTguri, jiXqueri (Brazil); carpinchera (Argentina).
Map 35.
266b. Mimosa pellita Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. dehiscens Bameby, var. nov., a var. pellita, caeterius haud diversa, leguminis septis interseminalibus tenuissime membranaceis vel obsoletis articulo quoque utrinque dehiscenti et semen suum ante valvulas delapsas liberanti diversa.—Brazil.
Distrito Federal: BrasUia, 975 m, 7.
IV.1966 (fr), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 15310.— Holotypus, UB; isotypus, NY.
Essentially like var. pellita except in dehiscence of pod, but less variable in pubescence, the cauline setae almost always appressed, the armament usuaUy sparse, the prickles on interpinnal segments of lf-stk often few or 0; body of pod 40-75 X 8-12 mm, 12-21-seeded, the papery brown, reddish or livid valves pilose with slender ascending or forwardly subappressed tawny setae to 2.5-4 mm, the interseminal septa 0 or tenuously membranous, mptured by the swelling seed and dehiscent at each end, the seed itself freefalling naked.
In moist campo and also in seasonally dry campo cerrado, ±200-1000 m, scattered around the s. edge of the Amazonian Hylaea in Brazil, Bolivia, and Paraguay, from the headwaters of rio Jurua in Acre s.-e. through the Beni-Mamore basin in Bolivia to the middle Paraguai valley, e. through Mato Grosso and s. Goias to n.-centr. Bahia and centr. Minas Gerais.—Fl. throughout the year unless drought-inhibited.
Map 36.
266c. Mimosa pellita Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. hispida (Willdenow) Bameby, stat. nov. M. hispida WUldenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1037.
IS06.—''Habitat ad Caracas .
.
.
Bredemey- ^r."
-Holotypus, B-WILLD 19081, seen in microform!; isotypus (?), Bredemeyer 9, W! — Equated by Bentham, 1875: 438, with M. asperata.
Essentially like var. pellita except for narrow pod and smaU seeds, the stems appressed-strigose, armed close below nodes with infrastipular and on most intemodes with one infrapetiolar, all strongly recurved aculei, the prickles of lf-stks mostly straight; pods when weU fertilized 55-70 X 5.5-7 mm, 12-20-seeded, the articles 2.5-3.5 MAP 35.
Tropical North and South America and (inset) Mexico and adjoining states.
Ranges of M pellita Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. pellita, and M. asperata Linnaeus. mm long, hirsute with narrowly ascending tawny setae, individually indehiscent; 5^^<3f5 3-3.7 x 2.5 mm.
In wet scrub-savanna below 800 m, known only from the Coastal Cordillera of n. Venezuela in edos.
Carabobo, Aragua, Distrito Federal, and Miranda.-H. X-II(-?).
267.
Mimosa tarda Bameby, sp. nov., M. pellitae sens. lat. arete et propter leguminis eseptati articula ipsa dehiscentia ejus var. dehiscenti arctissime affinis, sed stipulis toto glabris castaneis striatim 10-20-nerviis bracteisque interfloralibus 3-5-nerviis (nec simpUciter carinatis) diversa, ulterius foliomm petiolo communi praeter spiculas interpinnales inermi (aculeis veris interpinnalibus nullis) notabilis.—Pem.
Huanuco: Prov. Leoncio Prado, dtto. Rupa Rupa, Aucayacu, 24.
III.1975 (fl, fr), /.
Schunke Vigo 5760.—Holotypus, NY.
Riparian shrubs mostly 1.2-3 m, in habit and inflorescence resembling and sometimes sympatric with closely related M. pellita, the stems and lf-stks either strigose with fine appressed setae (1-) 1.5-3 mm or hispid with subhorizontal ones 2-3 mm, the lf-stks never aculeate, the stems sometimes randomly armed with two immediately infrastipular and one distantly displaced infrapetiolar, stout broad-based, almost straight but distally declined brownish aculei 3-7 mm.
Stipules ovate or lanceolate 4.5-8.5 x (1.5-)2- 3.5 mm, the papery blades castaneous glabrous, striately 10-20-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of 70 60 50 ^0 MAP 36.
Parts of South America.
Ranges of M. pellita var. dehiscens Bameby and M. pigra Linnaeus. major lvs 9-17 cm, charged between each pinnapair with a sharp ascending spicule (1-)2-9 mm; pinnae (9-) 10-17-jug., the rachis of longer ones (2.5-)3-5(-6) cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6- 1.3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 30-46-jug., the linear, basally blunt-auriculate blades acute at apex, those at mid-rachis 6-11 x 0.7-1.6(-2) mm, 5-8.5 times as long as wide, dorsally venose with 4-5(-6) subparallel nerves nearly to blade apex.
Peduncles 1.5-4 cm; capitula without filaments 5-6.5 mm diam., at least when young conelike; bracts ovate or lanceolate cymbiform (1-) 1.5-3 mm, (3-)5-7-nerved, glabrous dorsally, ciliolate; flowers with calyx 0.7-1 mm, the orifice either fimbriolate or paleaceous-dissected; corolla 2.7-3.5 mm, the lobes at least thinly strigulose; filaments pale lilac-pink, united at base into a stemonozone ±0.5 mm, exserted 2-3 mm.
Pods mostly 5-15 per capitulum forming an umbelUform cluster, the stipe l-6(-9) mm, the almost straight body excluding terminal cusp 40- 60(-65) X 9-11 mm, 16-22-seeded, the thmly papery valves tuming livid and lustrous, hispid like the replum with slender erect-spreading yellowish setae (1.5-)2-3.5(-^) mm, the interseminal septa 0 or vestigial and fragile, not sealing the individual articles, these curling back to release the seeds; seeds narrowly oblong-elUptic in MAP 37.
Central and tropical South America.
Ranges of M tarda Bameby and M. orinocoensis Bameby. profile ±5-6 x 2-2.5 mm, the olivaceous testa smooth dull.
In wet places, on lake-shores and river-banks, 5-800 m, discontinuously dispersed in tropical N. and S. America, lat. 18°N-16°S: fairly frequent in Central America around the Gulf of Honduras (Belize, e. Guatemala and Honduras), thence s.-e. to n. Colombia (Antioquia); n.-w. Ecuador (Esmeraldas, Pichincha, Manabi); interAndean valleys of centr. Pem (Huanuco, Junin); upper forks of rio Beni in Yungas, Bolivia; distantly disjunct, in slightly different form (stems hispid, not strigose) in e. Brazil (Ceara, Bahia and, perhaps introduced, coastal Sta. Catarina).—Fl. nearly throughout the year.
Map 37.
268.
Mimosa orinocoensis Bameby, sp. nov., M. pellitae adspectu similis et proxime affinis, sed ab ea setis caulinis de latere supra basin retrocalcaratum affixis, stipulis saltem ultra mediam dorso glabris crasse 6-8-nerviis, et calyce minimo haud vel vix paleaceo-lobulato distans, leguminis articulis septo 0.6-1 mm lato utrinque clausis cum M. pellita var. pellita congruens sed valvulis applanatis nec turgidis articulisque ipsis longioribus, ad medium legumen 4.5-8 (nec 2.5-4.5) mm longis diversa.—Venezuela.
Barinas: este de El Canton, a lo largo del rio Caparo, 100 m, 12.
IV. 1968 (fl, fr), /.
A. Steyermark (with G. Bunting & C. Blanco) 7022ii.-Holotypus, NY (2 sheets).
Scandent shrubs attaining 3 m or more, armed on stems and lf-stks with sharp recurved brownish pallid-based cat's-claw aculei 2-4 mm, the slender livid-brown homotinous branches at once minutely puberulent and strigose with forwardly subappressed, basally spurred brownish tapering setae to 0.8-2.5 mm, the foliage moderately bicolored, the lfts brown-olivaceous sublustrous glabrous above, paler and minutely silky-strigulose beneath, often proximally ciliolate, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary and 2-3(-^) together in the axil of coetaneous or quickly hysteranthous lvs, at first a shortly exserted pseudoraceme but early immersed in lvs.
Stipules erect, ovate or broadly lanceolate 2-4 x 1.3-2 mm, dorsally either glabrous throughout or pubemlent below middle, coarsely 6-8-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (6-)8-15 cm, the petiole including pulvinus 3-11 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 8-16 mm, the narrow ventral groove bridged between each pinna-pair and charged with an ascending bumished yellowish spicule 1.5-5.5 mm; pinnae 9-15(-16)-jug., of irregular lengths but usually decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 3-5.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.8-1.4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (25-)30-48-jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis, the first, often unequal pair 0.4-0.7 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.5 mm, the blades linear from obtusangulate or shortly auriculate base, acutely apiculate, those near mid-rachis (4-)4.5-9 x 0.8-1.6 mm, (4.5-)5-7 times as long as wide, aU veinless above, beneath finely (4-)5-nerved from pulvinule, the outer posterior nerves very short, the slightly displaced, simple or faintly few-branched midrib, the inner posterior nerve and the submarginal anterior one all produced to blade apex.
Peduncles 12-16 cm; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the 4-ribbed fl-buds scabrous-setulose at apex, the receptacle becoming 3-5 mm; bracts submembranous linear-oblanceolate 0.7-1.2 mm, weakly 1-nerved, dorsally glabrous, ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx shallowly campanulate or saucer-shaped 0.3-0.6 mm, glabrous extemally, the rim undulate or obscurely pallid-ciliolate but not paleaceous-lobulate; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.3-2.8 mm, the ovate 1-nerved lobes ±0.8 x 0.6 mm; filaments whitish or pinkish, united at base into a stemonozone less than 0.5 mm, the 4 longer ones exserted 3-3.5 mm.
Pods 2-7 per capitulum, in profile broad-linear planocompressed 7-10 X 1,3-1.6 cm, 12-18-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 2-6 mm, broadly rounded and sometimes cuspidulate at apex, the replum 0.4-0.7 mm wide, indented only where ovules abort, densely hispid on back and sides with coarse yeUowish setae ±1.5-2.5 mm, often in addition minutely whitish-pubemlent, the papery sublustrous livid valves likewise hispid with erect, somewhat longer coarse setae arising from a pallid pediment, either glabrous between the setae or minutely puberulent over seeds, when ripe breaking into transversely oblong, free-falling indehiscent articles 4.5-8 mm long, each sealed at both ends by a septum 0.6-1 mm wide; seeds transverse, compressed-ellipsoid 6.5-7 x 3-3.3 mm, the testa duU olivaceous.
On forested river-banks below 150 m, scattered through the middle and lower Orinoco basin in n.-e. Colombia (Vichada) and Venezuela (centr. Barinas and n.-w. comer of Terr.
Fed.
Amazonas downstream to the Delta); on lower Amazon river in Para, Brazil; and once collected in the Magdalena valley near 6°N in inter-Andean Colombia.—Flowering and fmiting nearly through the year.
Map 37.
Mimosa orinocoensis was coUected first in 1886 on the lower Orinoco by Rusby & Squires (77, 797, NY).
Their number 17, consisting of a flowering stem and a detached pod, was sent by Britton to Kew for comparison with allied forms named by Bentham.
N. E. Brown, who made the comparisons, believed the pod to be extraneous and pronounced the flowering element an exact match for plants from southeastem Brazil referred by Bentham to M. cinerea Veil.
Brown was mistaken on both points, and Britton, evidently dissatisfied, annotated the sheet with an unpublished name.
Subsequent collections from the Orinoco valley show the same broad and strongly flattened pod, characteristically hispid with stout setae arising vertically from a pallid pediment, attached to the foliage of Rusby's plants.
In stipules and foliage these indeed do resemble some examples of Brazilian M. elliptica, but the spurred cauline setae, the abbreviated calyx, the number of seeds per pod, and the ecology and dispersal are all different.
As it emerges belatedly from the shadow of composite M. pigra auct.,
M. orinocoensis is seen to possess the distinctive syndrome of glabrate venose stipules, cat's-claw prickles on stem and leaf-stalks, spurred setae, diminished calyx and broad pod breaking up into water-bome articles, these coinciding with a natural area of dispersal.
269.
Mimosa asperata Linnaeus, Syst. nat. ed. 10, 1312.
1159, hased on Aeschynom.ene spinosa quarta Breyne, Exot. pi. cent. 44, t. 20.
1678 ["fmtex brasiliensis"] and P. Miller, Fig. pi. Gard. Diet. t. 182,fig.3.
1760 [1757] ["discovered .. .at La Vera Cruz by the late Doctor Houston, who sent the seeds to England."
] — Lectotypus (Bameby, 1989:142): MiUer, t. 182, fig. 3; the specimen LINN 1228/32, proposed as lectotypus by Brenan (R. trop.
E. Afr.,
Leguminosae 1: 43.
1959), is believed to have been acquired by Linnaeus in P. Browne's herbarium and to represent M. pellita introduced on Jamaica from Panama. —M. asperata a hir- 5W^/(9r DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 428.
1825, nom. superff.
M. berlandieriA.. Gray in Torrey, Rep. U.S. Mex. bound.
2(Bot.): 61.
1859.-"Banks of the Lower Rio Grande, towards its mouth; Schott.
Environs [de] Matamoros; Berlandier (No. 3146)."—Lectotypus (Isely, 1971b: 420), Berlandier 3146, GH!; isotypi, NY (s.n.)! YU!; syntypus, Schott 125, XI.1853, NY!-M. asperata var. berlandieri (A. Gray) B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 331.
1898.
M pigra var. berlandieri (A. Gray) B. L. Tumer, Field & Lab. 24: 15.
1956. (?) M. spegazziniana var. glauca Burgerstein (ed.), Wiener m. Gart.-Zeitung 28(1): 17, fig. 3.
1913.-No specimen known to exist, but the figure, showing ±12 pairs of lfts per pinna, suggests M. asperata. — Equated by Burkart, 1948: 89, with M. pigra (=M. pellita of this account).
M. catalinae Leon & Alain, Contr. Ocas. Mus. Hist. Nat. Colegio "De La SaUe" 9: 9,fig.2.1950.-"[Cuba.
Pinar del Rio:] Bahia Honda, en una Canada de la carretera de Las Pozas, Leon No. 16847. .. ."—Holotypus, HAC, not seen; isotypus, US 28151891 = NY Neg. 7275^.—Equated with M. berlandieri by Bassler, 1985: 599.
M. berlandieri sensu Bentham, 1875: 423; Britton & Rose, 1928:169.
M. pigra var. berlandieri sensu Turner, 1959: 51, map 20; Isely, 1973: 105, map 34 (United States only).
Mimosafruticosa spinosa. .. Houstoun, Reliqu. houstoun.
11, t. 20.
1781.
Broad-crowned free-standing or, when crowded, semiscandent shrubs (1-)1.5-3.5(-5) m, erratically armed on intemodes and on interpinnal segments of If-rachis with perpendicular straight, lateraUy compressed, broad-based, early blanched aculei to (2.5-)4-l 1 x 2-6 mm (some young branchlets of some plants unarmed), the new stems, lf-stks and peduncles at once densely minutely gray-puberulent and either strigulose or hirsute with shorter subappressed or longer spreading-ascending, straight or flexuous, pallid or tawny setae to (0.5-)l-3(-6.5) mm long and ±0.05-0.2 mm diam. at base, the crowded subconcolorous lfts glabrous above, finely minutely silky-strigulose beneath, finely remotely setoseciliolate, the pseudoracemose inflorescence of globose or ellipsoid capitula exserted up to 2 dm in early anthesis, but each fascicle of peduncles subtended by a hysteranthous If, the fruits axillary to these, immersed in foliage.
Stipules ascending, firm, lance-ovate or ligulate 2-6 x 1-2 mm, gray-pubemlent or rarely glabrate dorsally, glabrous castaneous within, striately 6-9-nerved from base, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 2.5- 7(-9.5) cm, the petiole including (or sometimes reduced to) pulvinus 2-9(-ll) x 0.7-1.2 mm, the longer interpinnal segments (5-)6-12(-14) mm, the ventral groove bridged between pinnapairs and there charged with an ascending, commonly vulnerant, yellowish spicule (0.5-)1.8- 9(-l 5) mm; pinnae of lvs below inflorescence 4- 7(-8)-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 1.5-3(-3.5, in one instance 4) cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.6(-2) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 22-33-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the small first pair less than 1 mm distant from minute conic-subulate paraphyllidia less than 0.3 mm (often concealed by setae), the blades linear from obtusangulate or bluntly auriculate base, acute or apiculate at tip, those near mid-rachis (3.5-)4-9.5 x 0.7-1.2 mm, (4-)4.5-7(-8) times as long as wide, all veinless or almost so above, beneath 3-4(-6)-nerved from pulvinule, the slenderly prominulous nerves all parallel, the midrib a little forwardly displaced, the outermost nerves submarginal and produced to blade apex.
Peduncles solitary and 2-4(-6) together, (10-) 14-33 mm; capitula without filaments 5.5-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse 4-ribbed fl-buds scabemlousstrigulose distally, sometimes only minutely so, the narrowly clavate receptacle (2.5-)3-6 mm; bracts oblanceolate 0.6-1.1 mm, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, subheteromorphic, the lowest staminate, shorter and more broadly turbinate than the vase-shaped bisexual upper ones; calyx turbinate-campanulate or patelliform, including the variably fimbriolate-denticulate orifice 0.4-0.7(-0.8) mm, glabrous externally; corolla (1.9-)2.3-3.2(-3.5) mm, the ovate, scarcely thickened 1-nerved lobes (0.7-)0.9-1.3 X 0.7-1.2 mm; filaments pink fading whitish, united at very base into a stemonozone 0.3-0.55 mm, exserted 2.5-5(-7) mm; ovary at anthesis either glabrous or pilosulous.
Pods l-3(-5) per capitulum, ascending from mid-capitulum upward, stipitate or subsessile, the stipe attaining 5(-7) mm but usually less, the broad-linear, straight or slightly curved body (30-)40-75 x 9- 11(-13) mm, when weU fertilized 8-14(-15)- seeded, the body broadly or narrowly cuneate at base, at apex broadly rounded but mucronulate or cuspidate, the almost straight replum 0.5- 0.9(-l) mm wide, the reddish-brown or finaUy nigrescent valves low-convex over the horizontaUy transverse seeds, the replum and valves alike either minutely pubemlent or not so and either strigose with slender subappressed-ascending setae or hirsute with vertically erect ones to 0.7-2 mm, these not concealing the often lustrous surface of valves, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent, transversely oblong articles 4-7.5 mm long, each sealed at either end by a pithy septum 0.5-0.9 mm wide; seeds compressed-oblong-ellipsoid ±5.5-7 x 2.5-3 mm, the testa smooth, dull brown or brownolivaceous.
In low, seasonally wet places, on river-banks and -bars, at edge of lagoons, along ditches, sometimes in standing water, discontinuously dispersed, below 250 m, in warm temperate and tropical North America: Gulf Coastal Plain from the mouth of Guadelupe River in Calhoun Co., Texas, to Veracruz and Tabasco, thence s. to Belize and adj. Guatemala (Peten); on the Pacific coastal plain in Mexico, from lower rio Fuerte in n. Sinaloa s. into Nayarit; one record from Nicaragua; one population in w. Cuba (Pinar del Rio).—Fl. and fr. almost throughout the year.— Map 35.
270.
Mimosa elliptica Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker)4: 400.
1842.—"Rio Janeiro,L/z(9/5^, Burchell, Pohl, Sello, Gardner. "
—Lectotypus, Gardner 254, collected XL 1836 (fl, fr), K! = NY Neg. 11663; isotypus, BM!; syntypi: Pohl 1373, K! W!,
1374, K! = NY Neg. 1900, NY! Burchell 803, 1215, 1255, 1285, 1494, aU K! Lhotskys.n.,
B = FNeg.
13861\—M. asperata var. elliptica (Bentham) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 16.
1910.
M. cinerea Vellozo, R. flumin. icon.
11: t. 35.
1831, nom. illeg.; Fl.
Flum. in Arq. Mus. Nac. Rio de Janeiro 5: 438.
1881.—"Habitat mediterraneis."
— Holotypus (Burkart, 1948: 94), the cited plate!; non M. cinerea Linnaeus, 1753.—M asperata var. cinerea (Vellozo) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 16.
1910.
M vellosiana Herter, Revista Sudamer.
Bot. 3(4-6): 157.
1936, nom. illeg.; non M. velloziana Martius, 1839.
M vellosiella Herter, Revista Sudamer.
Bot. 6(5-7): 151.
1940.
M. elliptica sensu Bentham, 1875: 438, 1876: 382; Lewis, 1987, fig. 8V. M. cinerea sensu Bentham, 1876: 383, ex parte, quoad pi. bras, januar.,
caet. exclus.
Diffuse, decumbent or assurgent shrubs attaining 2 m but mostly less, essentially like M. pigra except in glabrate ffowers, non-paleaceous calyx, further exserted filaments, and relatively fewseeded strigose pods, the stems, lf-stks and peduncles either thinly strigose with forwardly subappressed setae to 1-2.5 mm or more loosely hispid with widely ascending setae up to 3-4.5 mm, the stems and commonly some interpinnal segments of lf-stks armed with broad-based straight aculei.
Stipules as in M. pigra.
Leaf-stalks 4-11 cm, the petiole with pulvinus 3-6(-7) mm, the interpinnal segments 8-20 mm, the spicule between pinna-pairs 2-13 mm; pinnae (4-)5-9- jug., the axis of longer ones 2-4.5 cm; lfts of longer pinnae (21-)22-40-jug., faciaUy glabrous or dorsally puberulent, remotely setose-ciliolate.
Capitula oblong-ellipsoid or subglobose, without filaments 6.5-12 x 5.5-7 mm;y/ow^r^ with campanulate calyces 0.5-0.8 mm, glabrous extemally, the rim minutely fimbriolate but not setosepaleaceous; corolla 2.2-3.1 mm, the lobes glabrous or minutely obscurely scaberulous extemally; four longer filaments exserted 5-8 mm.
Pods 40-55 X 9-10 mm, 8-12-seeded, the valves thinly strigose with slender, forwardly appressed setae to 0.8-1.5 mm, not villosulous, the indehiscent articles 3—4.5 mm long, at least twice as wide, sealed at each end by septum 0.1-0.2 mm wide.
In habitats indifferently recorded, but favoring sandy soils, sometimes in restinga, scattered along the coast and coastal plain of s.-e. Brazil from Caravelas in s. Bahia s.-w. through Rio de Janeiro (with Guanabara) to e. S. Paulo (S. Sebastiao).—Fl. principally XI-II, sporadically in other months.—Cult, in Tanganyika (Brenan, 1959: 42).
My concept of M. elliptica embraces all genuine habbasias which have glabrous or almost glabrous ffowers together with simply campanulate, non-paleaceous calyx and long-exserted filaments, whether the capitula are ellipsoid, as stipulated by Bentham, or globose.
Variation in length of the receptacle is commonplace both in this species and in M. pellita and is independent of variation in stature, pubescence, or other characters.
As shown in the synonymy I include here, with considerable confidence, M. cinerea Vellozo.
It is reasonable to suppose that the crude drawing in Flora Fluminensis, which (excluding the extraneous polyandrous ffower) constitutes the type of M. cinerea, was based on a plant found near Rio de Janeiro, and does not represent the kindred species of the lower Paraguay valley to which it has been referred in modem times.
The misconception that there is a M. vellosiella (M. cinerea VeU.,
non Linn.) common to tropical southeastem Brazil and northeastern extratropical Argentina arose in 1842 when Bentham (J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 401) misidentified as M. cinerea Tweedie's collections from Entre Rios and La Plata of the species herein recognized as the original Linnaean M. pigra.
Like its common relative M. pellita, M. elliptica varies much in pubescence and in development of cauUne and petiolar prickles.
Pohl 1374 (K, NY) has relatively long loose setae on stems and leaf-stalks, and all are armed with subhorizontal broad-based aculei.
More often the pubescence is appressed, strigose rather than hispid, and aculei appear and disappear erratically, sometimes at different levels of one stem.
It is material of the latter type that Bentham associated with Argentine M. pigra, even though in some cases (e.g., several specimens in hb. Martius, BR) the capitula are much longer than wide and the ffowers glabrous.
271.
Mimosa pigra Linnaeus, Cent. pi. I: 13.
1755, based on Aeschynomene spinosa quinta Breyne, Exot. pi. cent. 44, t. 20.
1678 andAe. spinosa quinta .
.
. seu foliis acaciae latioribus .
.
.
J. Commelijn, Horti med. amstelod.
2: 59, t. 30.
1697, both described from plants raised in Holland from American seed.—Lectotypus (Brenan, ¥1. trop.
E. Afr.,
Leguminosae 1: 43.
1959): Commelijn, op. cit. t. 30, but best restricted to the foliage element alone, the attached pods being fanciful and the detached pod possibly not conspecific—M. asperata ^ pigra (Linnaeus) Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1035.
1805, comb, illeg. M. asperata ^ laevior DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 428.
1825, nom. illeg.- Non M. pigra auct. recentior.,
quae = M. pellita.
M. vellosiella sensu Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 94, fig. lOV + lam. 8.
1948, exclus. basionym. et var. pubescenti; Burkart, 1967: 440, 1987: 496, fig. 220.
M. asperata ^ glabrior Hooker & Amott in Hooker, Bot. Misc.
3: 202.
1832, nom. nud.—"Sandy shores ofLa Plata, Tweedie [73, K(hb. Hook.)]!"-M. tweedieana Bameby in adnot.,
nom. nud., proposed before the identity of M. pigra had been ascertained.
M. cinerea sensu Bentham, 1876: 383, ex parte, excl. pi. brasil. januar.
Diffuse and trailing, adventitiously rooting shrubs forming riparian thickets ±5-16 dm tall and of indefinite extent, erratically armed on stems, lf-stks and occasionally on peduncles with sharp recurved or only subdeclined, broad-based stramineous or fuscous aculei 0.7-5 mm (random branchlets unarmed) and thinly strigose with slender, forwardly appressed basifixed tapering setae ±1-2 mm commonly mixed with minute pubemlence, the olivaceous, when dry brownish foliage appearing glabrous but the lfts commonly ciliolate near base and often minutely strigulose dorsally, the infforescence an efoliate or proximally few-lvd pseudoraceme of small globose capitula exserted up to 15 cm.
Stipules erect, ovate or lanceolate ±2-4.5 x 1-2 mm, the firm blades coarsely 7-10-nerved, either glabrous or graypubemlent (but not setose) dorsally, commonly setulose-ciliolate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 4.5-10 cm, the petiole including pulvinus 5-13 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 9-18 mm, the interpinnal spicules (0.5-)l-7 mm; pinnae of larger lvs 4-8(-10)-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones (2.5-)3-6 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.2-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20-35-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the blades linear or Unear-oblong from obtusangulate base, mostly obtuse apiculate, those near mid-rachis 5.5-10.5 x 1.1-2.5 mm, ±3.6-6 times as long as wide, all ±6-nerved from pulvinule, the slightly displaced midrib weakly 1-2- branched on each side, the adjacent anterior and posterior nerves usually expiring short of blade apex but sometimes attaining it, the outer posterior ones much shorter.
Peduncles l-4(-5) per node of infforescence, 7-17(-24) mm; capitula without filaments 5-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse ff-buds densely scabemlous-setulose; bracts oblanceolate, less than 1.5 mm, 1-nerved, minutely ciliolate; y/ovv^r^ almost of M. pellita but slightly smaller, the ciliolate but scarcely paleaceous-lobulate calyx ±0.6- 0.85 mm, the corolla 1.5-1.8 mm; filaments pink, the longer set exserted ±2 mm.
Pods solitary and to six per capitulum, either sessile or narrowed at base into a stout stipe to 3 mm, the body in profile broad-linear 40-90 x 10-16(-17) mm, planocompressed except immediately over each of 6-12(-l 5) seeds, the replum 0.6-0.9 mm wide, the papery fuscous valves thinly strigose with fine, forwardly appressed tapering setae to ±1 mm and often also microscopically puberulent, when ripe breaking up into transversely oblong or almost square, free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 5-10(-12) mm long; seeds elliptic-oblanceolate, in broad view ±5.5-7 x 3 - 4.5 mm, proportionately broader than those of M. pellita, the olivaceous testa similar.
On muddy and sandy river-banks and estuary shores, below 150 m, locally abundant along rio Parana from near 22°S in Paraguay s. to the delta and the s. shore of rio de la Plata at ±35°S in Argentina.—Fl.
XI-IV, and randomly through the year.
Map 36.
I am in full accord with Burkart (1948, I.e.) that the riparian mimosa of the Parana valley that he described and figured under the title of M. vellosiella is a distinct entity peripheral to closely allied M. pigra auct. (M. pellita of this account), and in the context of its relatives best accorded specific status.
Relatively low stature, adventitiously rooting stems, relatively few pinnae and few, well-spaced leaffets, thin appressed vesture, and broad papery pod consisting of relatively broad articles enclosing proportionately broader seeds distinguish it.
I differ from Burkart in the belief that it is endemic to Paraguay and Argentina and that it is replaced on the Atlantic coast of southem Brazil by a sibling species M. elliptica, differing in glabrous corolla and much longer filaments.
The vexed nomenclature of the group has been analyzed elsewhere (Bameby, 1989).
The epithet vellosiella is typified by an illustration in Vellozo's Icones, based presumably on a plant from the vicinity of Rio de Janeiro, and therefore not applicable to the species considered here.
Mimosa pigra Linn., based on figures of a plant grown in Holland in the XVII century, is the oldest name for any member of the group dominated by polymorphic M. pellita.
The name is here applied to the species of La Plata estuary on the basis of similarity in leafformula, thin appressed vesture and relatively distant leaffets not found elsewhere in the complex.
272.
Mimosa miranda Bameby, Brittonia 37: 141, fig. 8.
1985.-"BrazU.
Bahia: planta9ao de cacau ao lado da rodovia BR 101, vale do rio Mucuri, 13 Jul 1968 (ff), Romeu P. Belem i554."-Holotypus, CEPEC ^677!; isotypi, IAN! K! LE! NY! P! R! UB! US! Fig.
19.
Prostrate, amply microphyllidious suffrutescent herbs 6-10(-?) dm with few-branched reddish stems adventitiously rooting at some lower nodes and with dorsal rib of lf-stks and peduncles densely hispid throughout with fine straight erect pliant mfous setae ±2-3 mm, the lf-stks in addition armed laterally with a few slender straight horizontal, basally compressed aculei 3-5 mm and between all or most pinna-pairs with a straight stiff" ascending stramineous spicule 2.5- 9(-l 1) mm, the lfts moderately bicolored, smooth glabrous purplish-green above, beneath olivaceous, striately parallel-veined and minutely pubemlent, weakly setulose-ciliate, the long-peduncled ff-spikes axillary to coetaneous lvs.
Stipules firm, triangular or lance-acuminate 2.5- 5 X 1-1.5 mm, the striately nerved blades densely hispid dorsally, glabrous within.
Leaf-stalks 4-8.5 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 2.5^.5 mm, the interpinnal segments 6-15 mm, the ventral groove narrow and shallow; pinnae 5-8-jug., a little accrescent distally, the axis of longer ones 3 ^ cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-0.9 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 30-35-jug., decrescent near each end of rachis, the first pair ±0.5 mm distant from minute subulate paraphyllidia, the blades linear, sharply apiculate, the longer ones 4-5.5 x 0.5-0.6 mm, the four primary nerves simple, very slenderly prominulous dorsally.
Peduncles mostly geminate 4-7 cm; flower-spikes without filaments 4 mm diam., the axis 3-4 cm; bracts 0.5-0.9 x 0.2-0.3 mm; ffbuds obovoid, thinly minutely pallid-setulose beyond middle; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, many in a spike staminate; calyx campanulate ±0.5 mm, the undulate rim minutely setulose; corolla turbinate-campanulate ±1.6 mm, the ascending ovate greenish lobes 0.7 x 0.5 mm, at tip a little callous but not cucullate, dorsally carinate by a fine pallid nerve; filaments pink, free, exserted ±4.5 mm; ovary barbellate along dorsal margin, laterally glabrous; pod unknown.
On white sand in the cocoa belt, at elevation and precise locality not recorded, known only from the valley of rio Mucuri near 18°S in s. Bahia, BrazU.-H. VII-VIII. Mimosa miranda resembles M. pigra in leafformula and in long interpinnal spicules, but differs greatly in prostrate subherbaceous radicant growth-habit, in mfous-setose stems, leaf-stalks and peduncles, and in pedunculate, narrow spikes of flowers.
273.
Mimosa weddeUiana Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 438.
1875 & in Martius, R. mm.
FIG. 19.
Mimosa miranda Bameby.
A. Flowering branchlet.
B. Segment of leaf-stalk, showing pair of aculei and ascending spicule.
C. Bract + flower. (All from Belem 3854.) bras. 15(2): 282.
1876.—"Habitat in uUginosis fruticetis humidis prope Albuquerque provinciae Matto Grosso: WeddeU."—Lectotypus, WeddeU 3262, FI (hb. Webb.), not seen; isotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1902; isotypus, dated VII-VIII. 1848, P!; syntypi, WeddeU 3241, P (3 sheets)! RB! and perhaps also WeddeU 256, F! = F Neg. 57326.
M. eurycarpa Herzog, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 7: 53.
1909, nom. illeg.-"Bolivia: Am rand des Sumpftumpels von Tuna im Monte Grande (Prov. Chiquitos), ca. 200 m, Juni 1907.
Herzog no. 118."
- Holotypus, Z! = NY Neg. 11888. -M. herzogii Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 14.
1919; non M. eurycarpa B. L. Robinson, 1898.
Shrubs (0.6-)l-3(-?) m with stiff but slender virgate branches, erratically armed with few stout subhorizontal intemodal aculei to 4-6 mm, the stems and infforescence thinly, the back of lf-stks and pinna-rachises more densely strigose with forwardly appressed ffagellum-tipped setae ±1- 3.5 mm, the dull olivaceous, facially glabrous, dorsally striate-venulose lfts minutely ciliolate distally, the solitary or mostly 2-3-nate globose capitula forming hysteranthously leafy-bracteate pseudoracemes at least at early anthesis exserted from expanded foliage.
Stipules early papery brownish, ovate or broadly lanceolate 2-4 x 0.8- 2 mm, striately ± 15-nerved, glabrous or (in Bahia) dorsally pubemlent.
Leaf-stalks including pulvinus 2-10 mm, bearing at apex dorsally a papery appendage resembling in texture and venulation a small stipule, and ventrally between the one pair of pinnae a stout ascending spicule 1- 2.5 mm; rachis of pinnae (2.5-)3-5.5(-6) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-2.2 mm; lfts 20-36("-40")-jug., strongly decrescent proximally, less so distally, the first pair ±0.5 mm distant from obscure conic paraphyllidia, their blades Unear-oblong obtuse from semicordate base, those near mid-rachis 8-12 x 1.4-2.3 mm, ±4.5-6 times as long as wide, all smooth ventrally, dorsally 10-13-nerved from pulvinule, the finely prominulous nerves except for short posterior ones all parallel and produced to blade apex.
Peduncles 12-21 mm; capitula without filaments 6-8 mm diam.; bracts lanceolate 2-2.5 mm, 3-nerved, ciliolate; ff-buds except for 4 dorsal keels forwardly strigulose-scabemlous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx-tube campanulate 0.5-0.6 mm, the scarious lobes unequal and irregularly setose-decompound, to 0.5-0.6 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 3-3.5 mm, the ovate lobes ±1.2 x 0.7 mm; filaments reportedly either pink or white (perhaps opening pink and fading white), very shortly monadelphous at base, the four longer ones distally dilated and exserted ±5 mm.
Pods 1-6 per capitulum stipitate, the stipe 9-28 mm, the planocompressed, broadly oblong or Unear-oblong, thinly appressed-setose body 35-60 x 12-17 mm, 6-13-seeded, the shallowly undulate-constricted replum 0.7-1 mm wide, shortly cuspidate at apex, the dull brown valves becoming firmly chartaceous, finaUy separating from replum and breaking up into transversely oblong indehiscent articles 4-6 mm long, these sealed at each end by a pithy white interseminal septum 1.5-2 mm wide; seeds (few seen) transverse, oblong-elUpsoid compressed, in broad profile ±6.5 x 3.7 mm, the pale khaki testa smooth sublustrous.
In pantanal thickets on sandy clay alluvial substrates near or below 200 m, known by few collections from the upper Paraguai basin in lat. ±18°-20°S, in Mato Grosso do Sul, BrazU (Albuquerque; Miranda; Ladario), Sta. Cmz, Bolivia (Tuna), and (without exact locality: E. Palmer s.n. in 1856, NY) Paraguay; and remotely disjunct near 12°S in the S. Francisco valley in w. Bahia (Crist6poUs).-R. ±XI-II(-?), the entire fruits or the empty repla long persistent.
As realized by Bentham, M. weddelliana is closely related to M. pigra and its allies, which it resembles in general vesture and in parallel venulation of the leaffets.
It is unique in the group, however, in leaves reduced to one pair of pinnae, and in the pod's long stipe.
The conjugate pinnae and coarse strigose indumentum suggest at first sight a connection with sect. Mimosa, but the ffowers are diplostemonous and the resemblance due to parallel evolution.
The few known collections of M. weddelliana from the Parana basin in western Brazil and Bolivia have dorsally glabrous stipules.
The one from Bahia, collected at a point more than 1500 km to the northeast, has dorsally gray-puberulent stipules and cauline setae a triffe more slender.
In other respects all are essentially alike and unquestionably conspecific.
274.
Mimosa dormiens Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pL 4: 1035.
1806.-"//^^- itat in Americae meridionalis arenosis ad fluvium Apure."
—Holotypus, collected in IV. 1800 along rio Apure between S. Fernando and its mouth, Humboldt & Bonpland 819, B-WILLD 19076, seen m Microform! = F Neg. 1322; isotypus P-HBK! M. humilis Humboldt & Bonpland ex WUldenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1037.
IS06.—"Habitat in America meridionali prope Indos Chaymas."
, the locality expanded by Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, Nov. gen. sp. 6: 254: "prope San Juan Cumanensium [Sucre, Venezuela]."-Holotypus, collected VIII-IX. 1799, Humboldt & Bonpland 107, B-WILLD 19080. seen m Microform! = FNeg.
1328; isotypus, labeUed: "locis aridis sylvae San Juan, Cumana," P-HBK!—Equated with M. dormiens by Bentham, 1875: 435.
M. intermedia Kunth, Mimoses 16, t. 6.
1819.—"Crescit in planitie graminea vestita.
Llanos de Calabozo [Guarico, Venezuela]."—Holotypus, collected by Humboldt & Bonpland in III. 1800, P-HBK!- Equated with M. dormiens by Bentham, 1875: 435.
M. dormiens sensu Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, 1824: 255; Bentham, 1875: 435, 1876: 378; B. L. Robinson, 1898: 330; Standley, 1922: 362; Britton & Rose, 1928: 167; Britton & Killip, 1936: 153; Ducke, 1949: 57.
M. intermedia sensu Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, 1824: 255.
Either simple erect or diffusely branched, in age often basally indurated but monocarpic herbs randomly but at times densely armed on cauline intemodes with straight horizontal stramineous aculei (2-)3-6 mm and near middle of each interpinnal segment of lf-stk with a subopposite pair of similar ones, the interpinnal spicules moreover modified into similar but often longer ascending vulnerant aculei, the stems, lf-stks and peduncles at once pubemlent and variably hispid-pilose or strigose with slender tapering or ffagelliform, smooth or microscopically scaberulous, widely ascending-incurved or less often forwardly appressed setae to 1-3.5 mm, the lvs olivaceous concolorous, sometimes red-tinged, bmnnescent when dried, the lfts either glabrous on both faces or puberulent beneath, finely ciliolate or not, the plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary or paired in a succession of If-axils, much surpassed by subtending If.
Stipules erect, firmly herbaceous commonly fuscous, ovate-acuminate 2-4.5 X 1.3-2.4 mm, prominulously 5-7(-8)- nerved from base, dorsally either pubemlent or glabrous but esetose, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-9 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus (2-)3-ll(-13) x 0.4-0.8(-0.9) mm, the longer interpinnal segments (4-)6-20 mm, the ventral groove charged between pinna-pairs with a stiff"acicular spicule to 3-17 mm; pinnae (3-)4- 7-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones (8-)10-22(-26) mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.7 mm; lfts of distal pinnae (10-)11-17-jug., strongly decrescent at each end of rachis, the smaU first pair 0.4-1 mm distant from pulvinule (paraphyllidia 0), the blades linear from obtusangulate base, obtuse or minutely apiculate, those near mid-rachis (3.5-)4-8.5 x (0.7-)0.85-1.5 mm, 4-5.6 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath slenderly (4-)5-6- nerved from pulvinule, the moderately displaced midrib either simple or weakly 1-2-branched on either side well beyond middle, the one submarginal anterior and the inner posterior nerves produced nearly to blade apex, the outer posterior ones progressively shorter.
Peduncles 8- 35(-40) mm; capitula without filaments 4-7.5 x 3.5-4.5 mm, prior to anthesis conelike hispidulous; bracts linear-oblanceolate (1.2-) 1.6-2.7 mm, 1-3-nerved, either glabrous or pilosulous dorsally, always finely setose-ciliate; flowers mostly 4-merous 8-androus, randomly 5-merous, all bisexual; calyx obsolete; corolla campanulate, finely 4(-5)-ribbed 1.3-1.7 mm, the shaUowly concave, apically fuscous and slightly thickened ovate lobes 0.3-0.7 x 0.3-0.5 mm, thinly scabrous-setulose extemally; filaments very slender, free to base, pale lilac fading whitish, exserted 2-3 mm; ovary after fertilization densely setose.
Pods usually several from near and beyond midreceptacle, sessile, contracted at base into a stipe to 1.5 mm, in profile asymmetrically obovate from broadly cuneate base, broadly obliquely rounded or subtmncate at apex, ( 7 - ) 8 - 1 1 x 6 - 8 mm, 2(-3)- or by abortion 1 -seeded, the replum 0.2-0.35 mm wide, shallowly constricted near middle, produced at apex as an erect cusp 1-1.7 mm, the papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, brownish proximally and fuscous distally, the replum and valves alike weakly hispid with incurved setae ±1-2 mm and in addition sometimes densely softly puberulent overall, the ripe valves separating from apically mptured replum and breaking into 2(-3) free-falling, individually indehiscent articles, the lower one inversely triangular, the distal one transversely oblong and ± twice as wide as long, each sealed along the common line of fracture by a septum 0.2-0.45 mm wide; proximal seed obliquely basipetal and distal one subhorizontal, both elliptic-oblanceolate in profile 4-5.1 x 2.2-2.6 mm, the testa olivaceous lustrous.
On muddy shores, in seasonally inundated savannas, and in openings of varzea forest mostly below 150 m, best known from the lower Orinoco and Amazon valleys, in Venezuela from Apure e. to Delta-Amacuro, in Brazil from the lower rio Madeira in Amazonas downstream to the Delta in Para, thence e. to rio Pindare in Maranhao; discontinuously scattered n.-ward, in Venezuela to the Caribbean coast in Sucre, in centr. and n. Colombia, and disjunctly in N. America to the Pacific coastal plain in Costa Rica (Guanacaste) and far s. Mexico (Chiapas), and to the Gulf lowlands in Mexico (s. Veracmz); records from Guyana, though plausible, are not confirmed by specimens.—Fl. as water recedes and long continuing in desiccated muddy places.—Dormidera.
Map 42.
This morphologically and ecologically specialized mimosa appears to be a monocarpic derivative of M. pigra, which it resembles in the long acicular interpiimal spiciUes and in the broad but short articles of the fmit sealed at either end by an interseminal septum.
The low stature, reduced leaf-formula, ephemeral ffowers with pallid, shortly exserted filaments, and above all the pod reduced to two (exceptionally three) articles, the distal one broader, are highly distinctive.
Mimosa dormiens was probably collected first by Sesse and Mociiio in Mexico.
A specimen (G!) distributed by Pavon and labelled "Guayaquil" was thought by Bentham to have originated there.
The species is unlikely to have been encountered by Pav6n himself, or by Tafalla in Ecuador.
275.
Mimosa strigillosa Torrey & Gray, ¥1.
N. Amer. 1: 399.
1840.-"Tampa Bay, also in East Rorida, Dr. Leavenworthl Banks of the Mississippi, Louisiana, Dr. Carpenterl Dr. Halel Arkansas, Dr. Leavenworthl Texas, Drummond (2nd Coll. 157, 158, 159)!"-Lectotypus (Isely, Amer. Midi.
Naturalist 85: 421.
1971), Leavenworth s.n. from Arkansas, NY!; syntypi, Leavenworth s.n. from Tampa, Florida, Hale s.n.,
Drummond H/159, all NY! M. dolichocephala Harms in O. Kuntze, Rev. gen. pi. 3(2): 66.
1898.—"Paraguay: Puerto Esperanza."
- Holotypus, O. Kuntze s.n.,
^B; isotypi, NY! US!— Equated with M. strigillosa by Burkart, 1948: 84.
M. sabulicola Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 548.
1904.—"Paraguay: in sabulosis insulae Chaco-y pr. Concepcion, Aug., n. 7209."—Holotypus, Hassler 7209, G! = F Neg. 28230; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 57263, NY! US! W!-M dolichocephala var. sabulicola (Chodat & Hassler) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 6.
1910.—Equated with M. strigillosa by Burkart, 1948: 84, q.v. for antecedent bibliography.
M. strigillosa sensu Burkart, 1987: 493, fig. 218 (optima!).
Unarmed or weakly armed herbs from an eventually stout woody taproot, the simple or occasionally branched, bluntly bifacial stems pliantly humifuse and (especially in wet places) adventitiously rooting from nodes, sometimes covered with sediment and appearing stoloniform, precociously ffowering when quite short but potentially attaining 1(-1.5) m, the aculei when present infrapetiolar and serially scattered along the narrow edges of intemodes, rarely also at base of pinnae, either straight or recurved, stramineous or pallid 0.4-1.8 mm, the stems, lf-axes and subvertically erect peduncles either strigose or less commonly hispid with forwardly appressed or sometimes widely ascending, tapering or ffagelliform setae to 1-4.5 mm, the sensitive foliage olivaceous subconcolorous, the lfts glabrous facially or rarely puberulent beneath, often weakly or minutely setulose-ciliolate, the ellipsoid or short-cylindric capitula single in a long succession of If-axils and varying from a little shorter to much longer than the associate If.
Stipules erect or subrecurved, ovate or semicircular from semiamplexicaul, sometimes shallowly cordate base, 1.5-4.5(-5) x 1.5-3.5(-^.5) mm, ±1-1.5 times as long as wide, the stiffly papery brown, glabrous or rarely minutely pubemlent blades striately 10-17-nerved from base, persistent.
Leaf-stalks when fully expanded (2.5-)4-14(-24) cm, the petiole (1-) 1.5-7(-19) cm, at middle 0.5- 0.8(-1.1) mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments (3-)4-16(-24) mm, the narrow ventral groove interrupted between pinna-pairs by a setose bridge but spicules 0; pinnae (3-)4-6(-7)- jug., commonly subequilong, the rachis (10-)12- 32(-45) mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae ll-18(-21)-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.5- 2 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0 or reduced to a minute papilla), the blades linear from obtusangulate base, acute or apiculate at apex, straight or a little arched forward, those near mid-rachis (3.3-)4-8.5(-9) x 0.7-1.5 mm, 4-6(-8) times as long as wide, all veinless or almost so above, beneath slenderly but sharply 4-5(-7)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the single anterior, narrowly intramarginal nerve and the inner posterior one produced almost to blade apex, the anterior like the midrib weakly 1-2-branched distally, the l-2(-4) outer posterior ones much shorter.
Peduncles (2-)4-16(-30) cm; capitula without filaments (8-)9-25 x (4.5-)5-8mm, 1.5- 2.4(-3) times as long as wide, prior to anthesis moriform, the bract-tips scarcely emergent between the obovoid, densely gray-strigulose flbluds; receptacle setose; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1-2.4 x 0.2-0.45 mm, 1- or proximally 3- nerved, minutely ciliolate distally;y/ow^r^ 4(-5)- merous diplostemonous, all but a few of the lowest bisexual; calyx submembranous, shallowly campanulate 0.3-0.45(-0.6) mm, the tmncate or obscurely lobulate rim usually minutely ciliolate, sometimes glabrous; corolla 2-3.4(-4.2) mm, varying from narrowly turbinate to narrowly funnelform, the ovate, shallowly concave lobes 0.7- 1.2 X 0.6-0.9(-l)mm, 1-nerved, but often a little thickened intramarginally and appearing 3- nerved, extemally strigulose with forwardly appressed setulae to 0.1-0.25 mm; filaments pinklilac, monadelphous around the ovary through (0.5-)0.7-2 mm, exserted (4-)5-7.5 mm.
Pods ±3-12 per capitulum ascending, obscurely stipitate, the stipe 0.5-1.5 mm, the body in profile oblong or oblong-obovate (8-) 10-17 x (4.5-)5- 8 mm, 2^(-5)-seeded or some obovate 1-seeded, obliquely tmncate at apex and cuspidate at upper comer, the straight or shallowly (where ovules abort more deeply) constricted replum 0.3-0.45 mm wide, the papery stramineous or finally fuscous valves low-bullate over each seed, like the replum hispid with ascending or strigose with forwardly subappressed pallid setae ± 1-2.5 mm, the vesture not fully concealing the exocarp, the cavity with delicate membranous interseminal septa 0.3-0.5 mm wide, the articles at middle of 3-5-seeded pods ±3-5 mm long, those of 1 -seeded pods and those at ends of other pods longer, all free-falling indehiscent; seeds plumply oblong-obovoid ±4-5 x 2.7-3.7 mm, the smooth testa fuscous-olivaceous dull or sublustrous.
On stream banks, along ditches, in seasonally wet or permanently swampy meadows, and less often in drier, gravelly or sandy places, on shingle river-banks and in savanna-bmshland, ffourishing either in full sun or partial shade, near sealevel to 300 m, in Argentina attaining 450 m, of wide bicentric dispersal in warm-temperate North and South America: s.-e. United States, from s. Georgia to s. Florida, w. around the Gulf lowlands to Tamaulipas, Mexico, n. in the States to s. Arkansas (Isely, 1973, map 32); basins of rios Paraguai and Parana from near 22°30'S in Paraguay to 32°30'S in Entre Rios, Argentina and adj. Umguay, w. in Argentina across Formosa and Chaco to long. 65°W in Tucuman.—Fl. in n. hemisphere IV-X(-XI), in s. hemisphere IXIII.
Map 38.
Mimosa strigillosa is notable among close kindred for pliantly humifuse stems radiating from a taproot and for broad veiny stipules.
The plants vary greatly in size of parts, in wet rich lowlands becoming long-leaved, long-pedunculate, and freely rooting from stem-nodes, and under drier regimens smaU-leaved, short-pedunculate, and seldom producing adventitious roots.
In both hemispheres occasional populations have hispid rather than strigose-setose leaf-stalks and peduncles, and very rarely, as in the type of M. dolichocephala, minutely pubemlent leaffets.
In South America the corolla-lobes are densely strigulose extemally, in North America only minutely so.
Like Burkart (1948) and Isely (1971b, 1973) I perceive no significant racial division in M. strigillosa and, having studied all the relevant types, fully endorse the synonymy proposed by Burkart.
Burkart (1948) has suggested that the North American range of M. strigillosa may be secondary and the species autochthonous only in South America, home of its nearer relatives.
Disjunctions of similar pattem and magnitude are exemplified by Rhynchosia senna and Rh. diversifolia (Grear, 1978) and by Chamaecrista calycioides (Irwin & Bameby, 1982).
I know of no evidence that M. strigillosa is other than native in Rorida, Texas or Tamaulipas.
D(iv).
Series BIPINNATAE DeCandolle Mimosa sect. Habbasia ser. Bipinnatae DeCandolle.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Bipinnatae DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 427, majore ex parte.
1825.—Sp. lectotypica: M. somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Somniantes Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 401.
1842, nom. superfl.—Sp. unica: M. somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow.
M. sect. Habbasia ser. Microcephalae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 401.
1842.—Sp. unica: M. microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow.
M. ser. Somniantes sensu Bentham, 1875: 433, 1876: 373, et auct. recentior.
M. XIII. Somniantes Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 145, in clave.
1928, nom. nud. Microphyllidious shrubs and subshrubs, some small or functionally herbaceous, either armed or not with random intemodal aculei.
Indumentum potentially or actually of four types: a) minute incurved villi; b) forwardly appressed strigae, these sometimes dilated and scalelike; c) gland-tipped setulae; d) plain setae, these in M. brachycarpoides and M. surumuensis either seaMAP 38.
Parts of the New World.
Range of M strigillosa Torrey & Gray. bemlous or plumose; but any one type of trichome or any combination of them at times independently lacking.
Stipules ovate or lanceolate, usuaUy striately 3-7(-9)-nerved, persistent.
Leafformula (i-)ii-xxx/(5-l 1)11-50; a spicule, either terete or lanceolate subherbaceous, between each pinna-pair; paraphyllidia either present or 0; longer lfts (2-)2.5-9 X 0.4-2 (in M. somnambulans 12-17 X 2-4.5) mm./^2/7or^5C^«c^ either simply or paniculately pseudoracemose, sometimes proximally foliate; capitula globose or plumply ovoid, without filaments 2.5-7(-8) mm diam., prior to anthesis either moriform or conelike; bracts 1-7-nerved, persistent, the lowest sometimes united and involucriform; flowers 4(-5)- merous diplostemonous, often some lower ones staminate; calyx 0.2-0.7 mm, in M. surumuensis, M. somnians subsp. longipes and M. brachycarpoides to 0.9-1.3 mm; corolla (1.7-)2-3.8(-4) mm, the lobes most often striately 5-11-nerved, but in M. scaberrima, M. microcephala and M. brachycarpoides 1-3-nerved; filaments either free or monadelphous through less than 0.9 mm.
Pods (unknown in several species) either stipitate or sessile, in profile linear or narrowly oblong in profile, (2.3-)3-6(-7) mm wide, the replum 0.3- 0.6 (in M. brachycarpa to 1) mm diam., the valves bullate or strongly coUiculate over each seed, in all but one sp. breaking into free-falling articles, in M. brachycarpa falling in one piece.
Spp. 12, all but one confined to Planaltine and Amazonian Brazil and the Guayana Highland, the polymorphic M. somnians throughout this range and far beyond it, s. to Bolivia, Paraguay and n.-e. Argentina, n. to s. Mexico, Jamaica, and Tobago.
The one diagnostic character common to all members of the very natural and essentially homogeneous ser. Somniantes (=Bipinnatae) as defined by Bentham was the striately nerved corolla found in no other group of mimosas.
While these species are extremely plastic in armature and indumentum, all have similarly veined leaffets and all but one of them similar narrow craspedia bullately distended over the seeds.
The exception is M. brachycarpa, which has a short, few-seeded, valvately dehiscent fmit reminiscent of that of ser. Pachycarpae on a small scale.
Two species described since Bentham's revision are perfect Somniantes as to ffower and fruit, but are anomalous in one element of the indumentum: M. surumuensis in plumose setae, and M. calliandroides in dorsoventrally ffattened, scalelike setae.
To this enlarged nucleus I here append M. microcephala, M. brachycarpoides, and M. scaberrima, which have the aspect, the leaffets and the fmits of the original Somniantes but differ either in cauline setae spurred at base, as though laterally attached, or dilated and scalelike as in M. calliandroides if sessile, but in either case in corolla-lobes only 1-3-nerved.
Despite this discord in venulation of the corolla, the resemblances in each case to at least one genuine member of Somniantes are so numerous that the relationship is not in doubt.
Thus M. brachycarpoides closely mimics M. brachycarpa in habit and leaf-formula, and approaches M. surumuensis in large calyx and incipiently plumose setae, while M. scaberrima and M. calliandroides, despite strong difference in leaf-formula, are alike in scalelike setae.
Once the definition of ser. Somniantes is expanded to admit these two species, it readily absorbs M. microcephala, which Bentham at first referred to a monotypic series but later transferred to ser. Asperatae (=Habbasia).
Here it long stood alone without obvious close relatives.
In the foregoing remarks I have continued to use the classical epithet Somniantes, but this is abandoned in the nomenclature here proposed in favor of Bipinnatae.
The series Bipinnatae DeCandolle was based on ten species.
The first of these is a member of ser. Quadrivalves, known to DeCandolle only through a drawing.
The second is a member of the present ser. Andinae and the fourth of ser. Rubicaules.
The seven remaining are all here referred to the present series and it seems appropriate to typify the epithet Bipinnataehy one of them.
As a result ser. Somniantes must be replaced by the anterior ser. Bipinnatae.
Conspectus of ser. Bipinnatae Mimosa * CoroUa-lobes striately (5-)7-l 1-nerved; setae of indumentum smooth; fmit a craspedium.
276. somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex WiUdenow I. subsp. somnians a. var. somnians b. var. deminuta Bameby II. subsp. lasiocarpa (Bentham) Bameby a. var. lasiocarpa b. var. lupulina (Bentham) Bameby III. subsp. viscida (Willdenow) Bameby a. var. viscida b. var. leptocaulis (Bentham) Bameby c. var. aquatica Bameby d. var. velascoensis (Harms) Bameby IV. subsp. longipes (Bameby) Bameby a. var. longipes b. var. possensis Bameby 277. glaucula Bameby 278. somnambulans Bameby 279. monacensis Bameby 280. poculata Bameby 281. leptorachis Bentham 282. calliandroides Hoehne ** CoroUa-lobes striately 7-11-nerved; setae of indumentum plumulose; fruit a craspedium.
283. surumuensis Harms *** CoroUa-lobes striately 7-11-nerved; setae of indumentum smooth; fruit valvately dehiscent.
284. brachycarpa Bentham **** CoroUa-lobes 1-3-nerved; setae of indumentum either basally spurred, or scaberulous, or both; fruit a craspedium, that of M. scaberrima tardily articulate.
285. microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Bentham I. subsp. cataractae (Ducke) Bameby a. var. cataractae b. var. lumaria Bameby II. subsp. microcephala a. var. communis Bameby b. var. microcephala c. var. mituensis Bameby 286. brachycarpoides Bameby 287. scaberrima Hoehne Key to species of ser. Bipinnatae I. CoroUa-lobes 5-11-nerved; cauline setae basifixed.
2.
Setae of stems transversely dilated and dorsiventrally compressed, scalelike, in dorsal view triangularlanceolate; s.-w. Amazonian Brazil 282.
M. calliandroides (p. 464).
2.
Setae of stems subterete.
3.
Trichomes of stems, lf-stks and pods smooth (rarely wanting).
4.
Lfts all less than 10 mm long and less than 2 mm wide.
5.
Rachis of longer pinnae more than 1 cm and its lfts at least 10-jug. 6.
Bracts subtending the lowerflsof each capitulum separate one from the next, not united into an involucre.
7.
Roral bracts short and narrow, 0.3-0.6 mm wide, l-3(-5)-nerved, the capitula consequently moriform prior to anthesis.
8.
Lfts of longer pinnae (16-)20-50-jug.; pinnae variable in length and number but, when exactly 2-jug., the rachis of distal pair at least 3 cm; widespread from Mexico to Argentina 276.
M. somnians (p. 450).
8.
Lfts of longer pinnae 9-11-jug.; pinnae of lvs at mid-stem exactly 2-jug. and rachis of distal pair less than 2 cm; known only from S. Francisco valley in n.- centr. Bahia 277.
M. glaucula (p. 460).
7.
Floral bracts lanceolate or ovate 0.6-2 mm wide, several-nerved, the capitula consequently mostly conelike prior to anthesis; widespread over planaltine Brazil, extending weakly w. into Bolivia.
9.
Pod stipitate, the stipe (1-)2-20(-30) mm, the body linear m profile, 7-16(-20)- seeded, the valves at maturity separating into free-falUng 1 -seeded articles; vars. lupulina and velascoensis of: 276.
M. somnians (p. 450).
9.
Pod subsessUe, the body oblong-eUiptic in profile, 2-5-, commonly 4-seeded, the valves deciduous from replum in one piece 284.
M. brachycarpa (p. 466).
6.
Bracts subtending the lower fls of each capitulum united into an involucriform collar; local in e. Brazil.
10.
Stems aculeate; pinnae exactly 2-jug.; sources of rio Parana near 15°S 279.
M. monacensis (p. 462).
10.
Stems unarmed; pinnae 2-4-jug.; Goias and Piaui in lat. 7°-12*'S 280.
M. poculata (p. 463).
5.
Rachis of longer pinnae 3-6(-7) mm and its lfts 5-9-jug.; centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil. .. 281.
M. leptorachis (p. 463).
4.
Lfts of larger lvs attaining 12-17 x 2-4.5 mm; e.-centr. Goias, Brazil 278.
M. somnambulans (p. 461).
3.
Trichomes of stems, lf-stks and pods arborescently plumulose-scabrous; shrubs of Guayana Highland in Venezuela (Bolivar), n. Brazil (Roraima), and Guyana. .283.
M. surumuensis (p. 465).
1.
CoroUa-lobes 1-3-nerved; setae of stems mostly spurred at base, thus laterally attached, basifixed and scalelike only in rare M. scaberrima.
11.
Pinnae (1-)2-4-jug.; cauline setae scabemlous, either proximally or throughout.
12.
Cauline setae transversely dilated, scalelike, lance-triangular in dorsal view, basifixed; calyx scarcely one tenth as long as corolla; local in centr. Rondonia, Brazil 287.
M. scaberrima (p. 472).
12.
Cauline setae slender terete, spurred at base, thus laterally attached; calyx nearly half as long as corolla; local in far w. Bolivar, Venezuela 286.
M. brachycarpoides (p. 471).
11.
Pinnae (7-)10-30-jug.; cauline setae smooth and subterete, basally spurred; Venezuelan Guayana, the Guianas, and Amazonian Brazil 285.
M. microcephala (p. 467).
276.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4(1): 1036.
1806.-Typus infra sub var. somniante indicatur.
Erect, assurgent, scrambling or rarely prostrate subshrubs, shrubs and treelets at anthesis (2-)4- 25(-40) dm, the tmnk exceptionally attaining 2 cm diam., the wiry terete or strongly ribbed branches together with lf-stks and axes of infforescence varying from subglabrous to densely pubescent and often in addition aculeate, the indumentum composed in variable density of: a) minute incurved villi, b) forwardly appressed strigae 0.2-2 mm, c) erect gland-tipped setulae 0.2-1 mm, d) erect or widely ascending plain setae, and e) scattered (not infrastipular) straight or gently curved, broad-based aculei to 1-4.5 mm, the firm plane lfts glabrous facially and ciliolate or not, rarely pubemlent dorsally, the simply pseudoracemose or paniculate infforescence of subglobose capitula either proximally foliate with diminished lvs or wholly exserted from foliage.
Stipules ovate, ovate-acuminate, lanceolate or lance-attenuate 2-7(-10) mm, prominently several-nerved from base, the margin glabrous or ciliate, the dorsal face either glabrous or densely gray-pubemlent.
Leafstalks 2-18 cm, the petiole commonly 4-45 mm, rarely subobsolete or to 6-14 cm, the longer interpinnal segments (4-)6-25(-30) mm; pinnae (1-2)1-3-, 2- 3-, 2-5-, 4-8-, exceptionally in some ample cauUne lvs to 13(-15)-jug., the rachis of longer pinnae 10^55 mm; between each pinna-pair an ovate entire or denticulate (2-cleft), triangular-subulate or rarely setiform scale (spicule) 0.4-1.5(-2) mm; lfts of longer pinnae 13-19-, 20-30-, 25-45-, 30- 50-jug., inserted 0.4-1.3 mm apart, subvertically imbricate in sleep, subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair less than 1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia, the blades narrowly oblong or Unear-oblong obtuse or subapiculate, those near mid-rachis (2-)2.5-7(-7.5) X (0.4-)0.6-1.4(-1.8) mm, aU dorsally 2-Anerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib giving rise on each side to (1-)2(-3) secondary venules, the venation pallid but not strongly elevated, in some smaller lfts obscure.
Peduncles solitary or 2-3 together, (0.5-)0.8-3(-3.5) cm; capitula without filaments (4-)4.5-7(-8) mm diam., prior to anthesis commonly moriform but in uncommon varieties conelike, the ff-buds varying from obovoid to less often pyriform; bracts varying from narrowly elliptic-oblanceolate to ovate 0.5-^ X 0.2-2 mm, 1-several-nerved dorsally, usually glabrous dorsally, sometimes gray-pUosulous; flowers 4(-5)-merous diplostemonous, the lowest in each capitulum often smaller and staminate; calyx usually membranous (0.25-)0.3-0.55(-0.7) mm, with entire or obscurely lobulate rim glabrous or sometimes minutely ciUolate or gland-fimbriolate, rarely (subsp. longipes) firm striolate 0.9-1.6 mm denticulate; corolla turbinate, that of bisexual fls (1.7-)2. l-3.5(-4) mm, the submembranous tube 0.9-1.5(-l.7) mm, the firm stramineous or reddish, ovate or lanceolate obtuse or subacute. shallowly concave lobes (1-)1.2-2(-2.2) x 0.6- 1.1 mm, striately 7-9-nerved; filaments pink, monadelphous through less than 1 mm, exserted (3.5-)4-7 mm.
Pods usually several per capitulum, in profile linear, attenuate at both ends, straight or slightly curved, the stipe commonly (2-)3-23(-30) mm but at times no longer than the marcescent corolla and rarely obsolete, the body when weU fertilized (25-)35-90(-l 40) x 3- 5.5, rarely 6-7 mm, (6-)7-15-, rarely 18-20- seeded, the shallowly undulate replum 0.3-0.5 mm wide, the brown, red or purplish-castaneous, when ripe papery, dull or lustrous valves either glabrous (but then often granular), or simply setulose, or both strigose and villosulous, or both villosulous and ascending-setulose, or stipitateglandular, finally breaking up into square, oblong or oblong-elUptic, buUately biconvex, free-falling, individually dehiscent articles (2.5-)3-8, rarely 11-13 mm long; seeds 2.5-3.6(-4) x 1.7- 2.9(-3.5) mm, turgid at middle, compressed toward margin, the brown or black testa smooth lustrous or minutely roughened.
The foregoing description attributes to M. somnians unprecedented variation in leaf-formula, in development of fforal bracts, and in pubescence or armament of stems and leaves.
Leaves of M. somnians are diverse in length of leaf-stalk, in proportionate lengths ofpetiole and rachis, in number and length of pinnae and, generally correlated with length, in number of leaflets per pinna.
A great part of the whole range of foliar variation may be seen in some individual plants between lower, middle and upper leaves of one stem, the leaves at mid-stem being generally larger and more elaborately divided than the rest, that is to say composed of more numerous but not necessarily (or often) longer pinnae.
The fforal bracts of M. somnians are commonly narrow, 1-3-nerved and not over half the length of the associated ffower-bud just prior to anthesis.
Occasionally they may attain the length of the buds without acquiring accessory nerves, and quite rarely are dilated and several-nerved, when they resemble striate stipules in form and texture.
In the extreme bracteose states, exemplified to varying degree by var. lupulina and var. velascoensis, the capitulum becomes conelike prior to anthesis, but this condition merely culminates a graduated series and provides an insecure specific criterion.
I arbitrarily assign greater weight to the further modification of the lower bracts into a fused involucral collar and consequently exclude from M. somnians the clearly derived M. poculata and M. monacensis.
The cuticular emergences of M. somnians are of five sorts, all common in Mimosa: a) minute villi; b) forwardly appressed strigae; c) fine setae capped with a livid nectary; d) vertical or widely ascending plain setae, often tawny in color; and e) laterally compressed, straight or incurved prickles which appear to be homologous with plain setae and, when short or slender, not clearly distinguishable from them.
Expression of these types of trichome is capricious, and each is encountered in almost every possible combination of absence, presence, density and dispersal in plants otherwise alike.
In search of correlations between indumentum and other phenetic characters or with geographic dispersal I successively sorted all study material by presence/absence of each type of trichome, without a priori assumptions as to taxonomic significance.
It tumed out that in this complex fine villi, as expected from general experience of the genus, are absolutely fickle and independent of other characters.
More surprisingly, the visually and tactually arresting viscid setae can come and go suddenly without correlated changes.
For example, prickly var. somnians between Mexico and Panama is prevailingly glandular, but random eglandular populations (Hinton 11337 from Guerrero; E. Nelson 2723 from Oaxaca; Davidse 2329 from Nicaragua, all NY) not otherwise different, are not rare in this region.
The type-collection of M. somnians, from the Magdalena valley in Colombia, is likewise a rare eglandular variant among prevailingly viscid stock.
Again, copious collections of var. viscida and var. leptocaulis from the environs of BrasUia contain pairs of plants identical except in this one respect.
On the other hand, a dense hispid but eglandular pubescence, sometimes mixed with weak aculei, and linked with short petioles and often gray-villosulous stipules and corolla-lobes, appears to be characteristic of the planaltine subsp. lasiocarpa.
It is readily apparent that prickles vary greatly in size and number between plants of a given region and even between parts of one plant, waning at times to the proportions of scarcely dilated setae; but while prickly plants are encountered through the whole immense range of the species, from Mexico to Argentina, unarmed ones are not.
A dispersal map differentiating solely between aculeate and non-aculeate M. somnians shows the former alone at and near the periphery of the species-range, but relatively rare in eastem Brazil; whereas the unarmed forms are concentrated in great numbers and variety on the Planalto and extend outside it only feebly to northeastern Brazil and Bolivia, and quite sporadically further.
The disparate ranges of aculeate and unarmed M. somnians suggest divergent histories, or different proclivities for dispersal (or survival), or both.
Tuming from indumentum to leaf-formula, I again sorted the material successively by number of pinnae, by length of pinna-rachis, and by number of leaffets per pinna.
Number of pinnae appears to be higher on the average in aculeate than in unarmed M. somnians, yet is so capriciously variable, even at times between leaves of one stem, that it must be admitted an ineffectual, even deceptive character, despite tradition to the contrary.
Length of pinnae and leaffet-number are at least approximately linked, and together are more stable than number of pinnae per leaf, both on a single plant and among otherwise like plants, whether aculeate or not.
Flowers and fruits, the latter almost as variable in indumentum as the stems, are characteristic of ser. Somniantes sensu lato and offer no tangible characters at or below the specific level.
In his first paper on Mimosa Bentham (1842) described four aculeate and (in what I here define as M. somnians) six unarmed members.
In his monograph (1875) and Flora Brasiliensis he acknowledged that supposed differences between members of the armed group had broken down and had no geographic plausibility; but he continued to maintain the unarmed ones, adding a seventh.
Modem collections referable to Bentham's unarmed group demonstrate intergradient morphologies of the same order as, though not quite coextensive with, those admitted to M. somnians sensu lato of Bentham's last revision.
Little is known in detail about the ecology of M. somnians, but what is known and what can be inferred from dispersal and collectors' comments is suggestive.
Prickly subsp. somnians is a weedy opportunist often abundant in seasonally swampy lowland habitats, a precociously ffowering herb potentially bushy or scrambling at maturity.
The unarmed planaltine subspecies are primarily plants of upland campo habitats, with functionally herbaceous stems arising yearly from lignescent rootstocks, doubtless selected by intermittent fire but nevertheless still capable of acquiring, in some cases and in protected microhabitats, leaffess woody tmnks.
This broad generalization must be qualified to admit particular exceptions, such as specialized unarmed var. aquatica, or specialized aculeate var. deminuta.
Reffecting on the morphological variation within M. somnians, which superficially appears chaotic, I discerned three major and one minor, approximately concentric circles of affinity, here titled subspecies, each successively less widespread spatially and here modified edaphically.
In this view subsp. somnians, in which all types of indumentum are at least potentially realized and which has, by and large, the more elaborate leaf-formula, emerges as the primitive stock, which has proved sufficiently plastic to endure extremes of climate between subtropical and hylaean without loss of identity.
From this must have arisen by selection unarmed and commonly glabrescent subsp. viscida, ubiquitous in highland eastem Brazil and extending outside the cerrado climax only into ecologically related campo or rupestral habitats; the ecologically similar and sympatric but less widespread subsp. lasiocarpa, in which simple setose eglandular indumentum has become nearly stabilized; and finally the very local subsp. longipes, which has its own characteristic calyx and foliage, but may be aculeolate or not.
Key to subspecies of M. somnians Petiole proper 0.4-4.5(-6) cm; calyx 0.25-0.7 mm, the membranous tube subtmncate; range of the species.
2.
Stems either aculeate (sometimes only remotely so) or densely hispid with coarse tawny, erect or widely spreading-ascending setae, or both at once, sometimes in addition stipitate-glandular.
3.
Stems always aculeate, but in addition only remotely setose or not so, otherwise varying from subglabrous to puberulent or densely glandular-setulose; Mexico to Argentina 276/1. subsp. somnians (p. 453).
3.
Stems unarmed or obscurely aculeolate but densely shaggy-hispid, setae replacing or almost concealing aculei, none gland-tipped; planaltine BrazU 276/11. subsp. lasiocarpa (p. 454).
2.
Stems unarmed but varying from glabrous to strigose and in addition often but not always glandular, ascending-spreading plain setae usually 0, rarely few and remote; planaltine Brazil and n. to French Guiana, w. to Bolivia 276/III. subsp. viscida (p. 457).
Petiole proper 6-14 cm; calyx 0.9-1.6 m, the deUcately striolate tube 0.7-1 mm, the unequal teeth to 0.3-0.6 mm; Espigao Mestre in transfranciscan Bahia and adj Goias, Brazil 276/IV. subsp. longipes (p. 460).
276/1.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. somnians.
M. somnians Willdenow, 1806, I.e., sensu parum ampliato.—Typus sub var. somniante indicatur.
Stems and some lf-stks armed with either crowded or remotely scattered aculei and in addition often, but not invariably, pubescent with fine villi, gland-tipped setulae, plain setae, or some combination of these, when with plain setae these few and scattered, not forming a dense hispid indumentum; range of the species, from Mexico to Argentina.
Key to varieties of subsp. somnians I. Lf-stks of longer lvs commonly more than 0.35 mm diam.; rachis of longer pinnae 15-55 mm, bearing 20-50 pairs of lfts; range of the species.
276/Ia. var. somnians (p. 453).
1.
Lf-stks of longer lvs subfiliform 0.25-0.35 mm diam.; rachis of longer pinnae 9-14 mm, bearing 13-19 pairs of lfts; local in Venezuelan Guayana and n.-e. Colombia 276/Ib. var. deminuta (p. 454).
276/Ia. Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. somnians var. somnians.
M. somnians WUldenow, 1806, I.e., sens. str.—^^Habitat in America calidiore."
, more exactly, teste Kunth, Mimoses 20.
1819 & t. 7.
1820: "in declivitate orientali Andium Novo-Granatensium, prope Ibague et Cuesta de Tolima [Magdalena valley in Tolima, Colombia]."-Holotypus, B-WILLD 79077, seen in Microform!; isotypi, Humboldt & Bonpland 1845, P-HBK!5.«
.,
"Cuesta de Tolima," P(hb. Bonpland.)! M. palpitans Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4(1): 1036.
IS06.—"Habitat in America meridionaU."—Holotypus, collected by Humboldt & Bonpland at an unrecorded locaUty, B-WILLD 19078, seen in Microform!—Not represented at P-HBK.—Equated with M. somnians by Bentham, 1875:434.
M. somniculosa Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, Nov. gen. sp. 6(qu): 257.
1824.—"Crescit inter tropicos Americae."
—Holotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland s.n.,
P-HBK!; isotypus, P!—Equated with M. somnians by Bentham, 1875: 434.
M. podocarpa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 397.1842. — "BrazU, Pohl, Sello."
-Lectotypus, Pohl d.l428 = 3222, collected between Pirapora and Genipapo, Minas Gerais, VII. 1820 (fl, fr), K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1881, 11642; isotypi, K (hb. Hook.)! NY! W!; probable isotypus, Pohl 511/1525, LE!; syntypus, Sello s.n.,
K!—M somnians var. podocarpa (Bentham) Niederlein, Bol. Mens.
Mus. Prod.
Argentines 3(31): 296.
1890, nom.—Equated with M. somnians by Bentham, 1875: 434.
M. quadrijuga Salzmann ex Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 398.
1842.-"Brazil, Sello; Bahia, Salzmann.''- Lectotypus, Salzmann s.n.,
K (2 sheets)! = NY Neg. 11640; isotypi, LE! M!—M somnians var. quadrijuga (Bentham) Niederlein, Bol. Mens.
Mus. Prod.
Argentinos 3(31): 296.
1890, nom.—Equated with M. somnians by Bentham, 1875: 434.
M. somnians fi glandulosa Grisebach, Bonplandia 6: 6.
1858.—Collected in Panama by E. P. Duchassaing de Fontbressin.—Holotypus to be sought at GOET; probable isotypus, "Af. articulata Duchass. [nom. nud.]," P! [M. vialis Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 434.
1875, nom. nud. in syn.].
M. somnians fma viscida Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 556 [=P1. hassler.
412].
1904.-"[Paraguay:] .
.
. ad ripam fluminis Corrientes, Dec, n. 5855."—Holotypus presumably at G but overlooked.
M. tobagensis Urban, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 15: 307.
1918.—"In Tobago prope Scarborough, m. Dec.[1913], H. et fr.: Broadway no. 4776 " - Holotypus, +B; isotypus, NY! M. somnians sensu Kunth, Syn. pi. 256.
1823; Mimoses 20, t. 7; Bentham, 1876: 373; Britton & Rose, 1928: 161; Burkart, 1948: 53, lam. 1, fig. 3.
M. podocarpa var. acutiflora sensu Wawra, Bot. Ergebn. t. 34 (optima!).
1866, exclus. typ. (Wawra 123, W!).
Herbaceous when young but potentiaUy fmticose and attaining 3 m in favorable places, apparently never acquiring a xylopodium, in detail as the subsp., with these particulars: leaf-stalks 3-19 cm, the petiole 0.6-3.5 cm; pinnae 3-8 (-9)-, exceptionally to 12-15-jug., the rachis of longer ones (17-)20-65 mm, their lfts (20-)22- 50-jug., stipe of pod (2-)3-24 mm, the body (25-)30-70 X 3.5-5.5(-7) mm, the articles 4-7 mm long. In savannas, on open hillsides, in disturbed bmsh-woodland, at margin of gallery forest and in morichal, becoming weedy in plantations and hedgerows and forming thickets in moist lowland pastures, mostly between 10 and 600 m but ascending in Mexico to ±1000 m, in centr. Colombia to 1550 m, and in e. Brazil to 1050 m, intermptedly widespread from n.-e. Argentina (Corrientes, Misiones) to Mexico (on Pacific coast to Nayarit, on Gulf slope to Veracmz) and Jamaica (introd.); in S. America common in interandean valleys of Colombia; rare in lower Orinoco vaUey in Venezuela; Tobago; the Guianas s. through the Tocantins valley in Brazil to Distrito Federal and the Triangulo Mineiro, thence e. into upland interior and Atlantic lowland Bahia and interior centr. Minas Gerais, w. into Paraguay and e. Bolivia.—Fl. in S. America primarily X-IV, intermittently at other times.— Arestin (Ven.).
Map 39.
An enigmatic specimen (Linden 1210, ISTY), collected supposedly at 2340 m in Mariquita, Colombia, differs from all other Colombian M. somnians in lack of prickles, but agrees in other respects with sympatric races of the species.
276/Ib.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. somnians var. deminuta Bameby, var. nov., a var. somniante, caeterius simili, ramulis gracillimis, foliomm petiolo subfiliformi pinnisque abbreviatis 9- 14 mm usque longis, pinnamm foliolis usque 13-19 (nec 20-50)-jugis, capitulisque minimis ±4 mm diam. diversa.—Venezuela.
Bolivar: Piedra Marimare, e. bank of rio Orinoco opposite head of Isla El Gallo, 19.
Xn.l955 (fl, fr), /. /.
Wurdack & J. V. Monachino 40850. - Holotypus, NY; isotypi, P, US. Stems prostrate or assurgent 6-10 dm, freely branched, aculeate like var. somnians and either stipitate-glandular or subglabrous, the ultimate branchlets subfiliform; leaf-stalks of primary Ivs 4-7 cm, the petiole 1-2.5 cm, the longer interpinnal segments 6-14 mm; pinnae 4-8-jug., the rachis of longer ones 9-14 mm, the lfts 13-19- jug.; capitula without filaments ±4 mm diam.; stipe of pod 5-17 mm, the body 30-40 x 3-4 mm, 6-8-seeded, glabrous or glandular.
On and about denuded rock outcrops along the e. bank of rio Orinoco from near Puerto Ayacucho downstream to mouth of rio Caura, in Amazonas and Bolivar, Venezuela, and near the mouth of rio Meta in Vichada, Colombia.—Fl.
X-II. Map 39.
This ecologically specialized variety differs from var. somnians in abbreviated pinnae and consequently few leaflets.
Its slender growth-habit and tiny capitula are nearly matched by one collection (Plowman 9167, mun. Baba^ulandia, lat. 6°56'S, ISFY) from a savanna habitat in northem Goias, Brazil; but this has to 28 pairs of leaflets in longer pinnae.
The known range and habitat of var. deminuta are those of Chamaecrista glandulosa var. crystallina Irwin & Bameby.
A single individual plant (Gudnchez 4782, ISTY), found in a roadbed on lower rio Suapure in northwestem state of Bolivar, Venezuela, has extremely diminished foliage with these dimensions not allowed for in the diagnosis of var. deminuta: leaf-formula v-vi/11-14, rachis of distal pinnae only 3-5.5 mm, and longest leaflets only 1.5-2 mm long. 276/11.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. lasiocarpa (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. lasiocarpa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 399.
1842.-Typus infra sub var. lasiocarpa indicatur.
Stems virgately erect or rarely diffuse from woody rootstocks, unarmed or at times remotely aculeate, 6-15 dm, densely hispid with erectascending tawny setae to (0.5-) 1.7-2 mm often underlain by gray puberulence, nowhere glandular; leaf-stalks of larger lvs (2-)3-8(-9) cm, the petiole 2-12(-20) mm, the interpinnal segments to 5-15 mm; pinnae (4-)5-l l(-12)-jug., the rachis of longer ones (1.5-)2-4.5(-5.5) cm, the lfts (18-)20-40-jug., the longer ones (2.5-)3-7(-7.5) xO.45-1.3(-1.6) mm; capitula without filaments 5-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis either moriform or conelike; corolla-lobes often but not invariably pubemlent; stipe of pod (1-)2-5 mm, the body 25-50 x 3-4.5(-5) mm, (6-)7-12(-14)- seeded, the valves ascending-setose and commonly also finely villosulous, the articles (2.5-)3- 4.5 mm long. This subspecies differs from the rest of M. somnians principally in quality of the indumentum, in which plain setae, often accompanied by fine villi, predominate.
It resembles subsp. visMAP 39.
Parts of Mexico, Central America, and South America.
Range of M. somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. somnians. cida in habit and ecology, but approaches subsp. somnians in leaf-formula and occasional armature of prickles.
It differs from sympatric subsp. viscida in prevailingly shorter petioles, more numerous pairs of pinnae, and shorter stipe of the pods, but none of these characters is in itself decisive.
Key to varieties of subsp. lasiocarpa 1.
Floral bracts linear-elliptic, narrowly lanceolate or rarely lance-ovate, 0.7-2 x 0.3-0.6(-0.8)mm, 1-3-, rarely 5-nerved, almost always villosulous dorsally, none longer than the associated fl and the capitulum prior to anthesis consequently moriform; corolla-lobes dorsally villosulous or exceptionally glabrescent 276/IIa. var. lasiocarpa (p. 455).
1.
Floral bracts ovateor lance-acuminate 2-4 x 1.2-2 mm, striately many-nerved Uke stipules, either glabrous ciliate or densely gray-vUlosulous dorsaUy, surpassing the associated fl, the capitulum prior to anthesis consequently conelike; corolla either glabrous or distally gray-pilosulous; sporadic within the range of var. lasiocarpa. .. 276/IIb. var. lupulina (p. 456).
276/na.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. lasiocarpa (Bentham) Bameby var. lasiocarpa.
M. lasiocarpa Bentham, 1842, I.e., sens, str.—"Brazil, Sello, Pohl, Claussen.'', Pohl's locality given in Martius, n . bras. 15(2): 375.
1876: "ad Rio Agapite [=Corgo Agapite near Sa.
Dourada, ±16°S in Goias]."—Lectotypus, Claussen s.n. (fl, fr), K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 11633; isotypus, K (hb. Benth.)!; probable isotypus, Claussen 827, NY (hb. Meisner. via Lenormand.)!; syntypi, Sello s.n.,
K! Pohl 1478, K! M. acutiflora Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 397.
1842.— "BrazU, Pohl."
-Holotypus, Pohl d.l414 = 2095, collected 6.
II.1820 (fl) "ad rio Agapite [near Goias MAP 40.
Central America and e. Brazil (right) and (inset, lower left) e. Brazil.
Range of M. somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. viscida (Willdenow) Bameby and subsp. lasiocarpa (Bentham) Bameby.
Velho]," K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1882, 11641; isotypi, K (hb. Benth.)! NY! W!—M podocarpa var. acutiflora (Bentham) Wawra, Bot. Ergebn.
1 (exclus. t. 34).
1866.—Mistakenly equated by Bentham, 1875: 434, with typical M. somnians.
M. lasiocarpa fma glabriflora Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 6.
1910.—"[Paraguay:] ... pr. Esperanza, Sierra de Amambay... Hassler no. 10683 et. .. 10683a leg. Rojas."
-Syntypi, G! M. lasiocarpa sensu Bentham, 1875: 434, 1876: 375.
Characters of the subsp. except as modified in key to vars.
In cerrado, on red sandy and rocky substrates. mostly at 500-1025 m but in n. Goias descending to 290 m, intermptedly widespread over centr. and s. Goias, Brazil and all adj. states except Bahia, n. along the Tocantins valley in Goias to 7°S, w. to Sa. do Roncador in Mato Grosso and through Mato Grosso do Sul just into Paraguay (Sa. de Amambay), and weakly e. to n.-centr. Minas Gerais.-Fl.
IX-V. Map 40.
276/IIb.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. lasiocarpa (Bentham) Bameby var. lupulina (Bentham) Barneby, stat. nov. M. lupulina Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 399.
1842.-"BrazU, Pohr\ the data expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 377.
1876 to: ".. . ad Anta [s. of Crixas, w.-centr. Goias]."-Lectotypus,Pc>/z/^.7^7i = 1688, W!; isotypi, K! = NY Neg. 776^^, NY!; syntypi, Pohl d.l363 = 1909, BR! K! = NY Neg. 1888, NY! W! M. lupulina sensu Bentham, 1875: 435, 1876: 377, exclus.
Gardner3133 quae = M. brachycarpa et Martius s.n. quae = M. somnians velascoensis.
Characters of the subsp. except as modified in key to vars.
In cerrado near 700-1000 m, known only from centr. Goias, Brazil.—Fl. probably in the dry season.
Map 40.
Pohl's two collections of var. lupulina, other than Hatschbach 54035 (NY, collected in 1990) still the only ones known to me, are in habit and foliage identical with some examples of var. lasiocarpa, but are not identical to one another.
The lectotype, chosen over Pohl 1363 because its dorsally pubescent bracts agree better with the protologue and because its provenance is exactly known, has both the setose pubescence of subsp. lasiocarpa and a copious undercoat of fine villi that extends to the back of the stipules, bracts, and calyx-lobes.
This undercoat is reduced in Pohl 1363 to a rudiment.
The dilated floral bracts, to which the epithet refers, may perhaps have arisen by independent mutation from more and less villosulous variants of var. lasiocarpa in the same way that var. velascoensis is surmised to have arisen from var. viscida.
While there is no means of ascertaining at present whether or not var. lupulina exists as a discrete self-perpetuating entity independent of var. lasiocarpa, its close kinship to the latter cannot be gainsaid.
276/III. Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland subsp. viscida (WiUdenow) Bameby, stat. nov. M. viscida Willdenow, Enum. pi. hort. berol.
1048.
1809, sens, ampliat.—Typus infra sub var. viscida indicatur.
Stems and lf-stks unarmed, variably villosulous, strigose, capitate-glandular or subglabrous, never densely hispid with plain setae; e. Brazil (Amapa to S. Paulo, w. to Mato Grosso do Sul), Bolivia, and French Guiana; Belize.
I include in subsp. viscida all unarmed M. somnians found on the Brazilian Planalto other than densely hispid subsp. lasiocarpa and rare subsp. longipes distinguished by long-petiolate leaves.
Glandular trichomes are found in variable density in many populations of the subspecies, but sometimes only on the fertilized ovary and pod; often they are lacking, when the epithet becomes a misnomer.
1.
Key to varieties of subsp. viscida Roral bracts less than 1 mm long and not over 0.5 mm wide, 1-3-, exceptionally 5-nerved.
2.
Stems arising from woody rootstock or xylopodium, or surviving into a second season as woody tmnks; pinnae 2-8-jug.; plants of dry sandy or rocky ground; pod evidently stipitate; range of the subsp. 3.
Rachis of longer pinnae 3 cm long or more 276/IIIa. var. viscida (p. 457).
3.
Rachis of longer pinnae less than 3 cm; abundant in Distrito Federal, occasional in adj. Goias, erratically to centr. Minas Gerais, S. Paulo, Mato Grosso do Sul 276/IIIb. var. leptocaulis (p. 458).
2.
Stems arising from inflated pallid rhizomes, essentially herbaceous; pinnae to 10-13-jug.; plants of wet muddy ground; pod subsessUe; local in s. Mato Grosso 276/IIIc. var. aquatica (p. 458).
Floral bracts 1-3 mm long and over0.5 mm wide, the largerones ofacapitulum 7-11-nerved; uncommon in range of var. viscida, w. into BoUvia 276/IIId. var. velascoensis (p. 459).
276/IIIa.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. viscida (WiUdenow) Bameby var. viscida.
M. viscida Willdenow, 1809, I.e., sens, str.—"Habitat in Brasilia.
Comes de Hoflfmannsegg."
—Holotypus, collected in Para by F. W. Sieber, B-WILLD 19087, seen in Microform!—M. multiglandulosa Humboldt ex Sprengel, Syst. veg. 2: 205.
1825, nom. superfl., an inadvertent duplication of M viscida (overlooked in the Systema) and based on the same typus.—M. somnians var. viscida (Willdenow) Barneby, Brittonia 37: 144.
1985.
M. trijuga Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 398.
1842.- "Brazil, Pohl."
, the locality given in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 376.
1876: "ad Commba m Serra D'Ourada et Montes Claros [s.-centr. Goias]."—Lectotypus, Pohl d.l376 = 1759 from Sa.
Dourada, Kl; isotypi, NY! US! W!; syntypi, Pohl 1206 from Montes Claros, NY! W! & 1211 from Commba, W! M. viscida sensu Bentham, 1875: 434, 1876, 374.
M. trijuga sensu Bentham, 1875: 374.
Erect unarmed subshrubs mostly 6-20 dm, commonly functionally herbaceous ±9-15 dm, occasionally in rocky places where immune to fire attaining 25 or even (Irwin 12347, NY) 40 dm with tmnk 2 cm diam., the stems.
Ifand inflorescence-axes varying from nearly glabrous to strigose-setose or densely capitate-glandular; leaf-stalks 4.5-13.5 cm, the petiole 1.5-4.5 cm, the pinnae of lvs at mid-stem (2-)3-5-jug., the rachis of longer ones 3-5 cm, the lfts (25-)30- 50-jug., the larger ones 3-6.5 x 0.6-1.4 mm; pods (4-)4.5-8(-9, and on Sa. de Carajas in Para attaining 14) cm, 3.5-5(-6) mm wide, (7-)8- 16(-18)-seeded, the stipe (2-)3-25(-29) mm, the replum thinly appressed-setulose, the valves either glabrous (granular) or setulose like replum, or the whole pod at times minutely puberulent, at times capitate-glandular overall, the articles (3.5-)4-7 mm long. In planaltine Brazil widespread in campo, cerrado, about outcrops, and on rocky streambanks, mostly at 600-1150 m but ascending on Chapada dos Veadeiros in Goias to 1500 m and descending in s.-e. Mato Grosso to 400 m, in Amazonia on white sand campirana and on rocky river banks or ferrous outcrops and down to 50 m or less, widespread over much of Goias (with Distrito Federal) and closely adj. states, extending s.-w. to the Parana valley in w. S. Paulo and e. Mato Grosso do Sul, w. to rio das Mortes in s.-e. Mato Grosso, e. to Espigao Mestre in transfranciscan Bahia, thence interruptedly n. to lower Amazon valley in Para and the Oiapock river on the Amapa-French Guiana border; greatly isolated on savannas of n. Belize; disjunct with (and there transient to) var. leptocaulis in highland n.- centr. Mmas Gerais.-H. (X-)XII-VI(-VII).
Map 40.
The earliest known collection of var. viscida is preserved in the Richard herbarium at Paris under the unpublished binomial ''Mimosa aeschynomenoides,"" collected, presumably before 1800, "in apertis subpratensibus udis sylvamm Guianae [doubtless French Guiana]."
276/IIIb.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex WUldenow subsp. viscida (Willdenow) Bameby var. leptocaulis (Bentham) Bameby, Brittonia 37: 144.
1985.
M. leptocaulis Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 398.
1842.—"BrazU, Pohl."
\ the locality given in Martius, Fl. bras 15(2): 375.
1876: "ad Morro do Manoel Gomez [s.-centr. Goias]."—Holotypus, Po/z/fi^.
7i 79 = 7^77. collected m .
1819 (fl), K! = NY Neg. 1884; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1336, NY! K! M. laevigata Bentham, Linnaea 22: 530.
1849.-"Ad Caldas prov. Minas Geraes: RegneU Ser. II, n 95. et in eadem provincia, Riedel."
—Lectotypus, RegneU 11/95 ex parte, K! = NY Neg. 1886, 11668 (plant at right); syntypi, Riedel 58 = 428, collected IX. 1826 (fl) on rio Pardo in Mato Grosso do Sul, K! LE!— Specimina numbered RegneU 11/95 (K, US) from Uberaba, Minas Gerais, are not isotypic.
M. viscida sensu Bentham, 1875: 434.
M. laevigata sensu Bentham 1875: 434, 1876: 376.
Like var. viscida but on the average more slender and the pinnae shorter, the stems (2-)3-10 dm erect, ascending or procumbently trailing, usually new each year from rootstock, glabrous or thinly strigulose or appressed-setose and rarely also (especially petioles and stipe or body of pod) capitate-glandular, the lfts often glaucescent; leaf-stalks (2-)3-9 cm, the petiole (11-)15- 35 mm, the interpinnal segments 4-15 mm; pinnae 2-3-, 2-5-, 4-8-jug., the rachis of longer ones 10-25(-28) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (17-)20- 35-jug., the blades attaining ±3-5.5 x 0.6-1.2 mm; pods 35-55 x 3-4.5 mm, (6-)7-12-seeded, the stipe 3-23 mm, the valves commonly thinly strigose and at times also glandular-setulose, exceptionally glabrous granular, the articles 3.5-6 mm long. On stony or sandy soils in open cerrado, 800- 1450 m, locally plentiful, common on the Brazilian Planalto in Distrito Federal and Goias s.- ward from 15°S and e.-ward from Sa.
Dourada, thence s. but only occasional through Triangulo Mineiro to n. S. Paulo and s.-w., descending to ±450 m, into e. Mato Grosso do Sul; disjunct at 900-1050 m on Sa. do Espinha90 in n.-centr. Minas Gerais.-Fl. (X-)XI-IV. Map 41.
276/IIIc.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. viscida (Willdenow) Bameby var. aquatica Bameby, var. nov., caulibus e rhizomate inflato hydrophilo assurgentibus, foliomm subsessilium pinnis 10-13- jugis usque breviusculis (±10-15 mm usque longis) necnon legumine subsessili notabilis.
70 60 MIMOSA SOMNIANS subsp. VISCIDA (ex parte): var. AQUATICA 0 var. LEPTOCAULIS0 var. VELASCOENSIS • MAP 41.
East-central Brazil.
Range of three varieties of M somnians subsp. viscida (Willdenow) Bameby. caeterius cum var. leptocauli congma.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso: near Sto. Antonio de Leverger, 15-25 km s. of Cuiaba, 12.11.1975 (fl, fr), W. R. Anderson (with Hatschbach, Barneby, Gates) 77550. -Holotypus, MBM; isotypi, K, NY, P, R, S, UB, US. Stems from subhorizontal, succulently thickened rhizomes, weakly incurved-ascending 3-9 dm, subglabrous, the stipules ciliolate, the lf-axes remotely strigulose; lvs subsessile, the pinnae of larger ones 10-13-jug., the rachis of longer ones ±15-25 mm, the lfts ± 30-40-jug. and only 2- 2.5 mm long; inflorescence of var. leptocaulis; floral bracts ovate, less than 1 mm, much shorter than fl-buds; pods 50-60 x 3.5-4 mm, 6-8-seeded, the body attenuate at base but not or obscurely stipitate.
In shallow standing water of sedge meadow (brejo) at 300 m, known only from the typelocality ±20 km s. of Cuiaba, s.-centr. Mato Grosso.—n. I-III. Map 41.
The type-population of var. aquatica appeared in the field strikingly different from var. leptocaulis in its wet habitat and pluripinnate subsessile leaves, but the inflorescence, and the pod except that its stipe is subobsolete, are essentially the same.
I take var. aquatica to be a local derivative of M. somnians subsp. viscida adapted to swampy habitat.
276/IIId.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. viscida (Willdenow) Bameby var. velascoensis (Harms) Bameby, Brittonia 37: 144.
1985.
M. velascoensis Harms in O. Kuntze, Revis. gen. pi. 3(2): 68.
1898.-"Bolivia: 200 m Ost-Velasco."
—Holotypus, O. Kuntze s.n.,
+B = FNeg.
1443\; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54871, NY (hb. Kuntze.,
2 sheets)! US! M. somnians var. velascoensis sensu Lewis, 1987, fig. 8N. Closely resembling eglandular var. viscida, the stems and lf-axes densely or thinly charged with appressed or narrowly ascending strigae to 1-2 mm, the lfts minutely cUiolate, sometimes pubemlent beneath; pinnae 5-8-jug. (of depauperate distal lvs fewer), the rachis of longer ones 20- 42 mm, the lfts to 30^3-jug.; floral bracts ovate or broadly lance-elliptic 1.5-3 mm, resembUng stipules in texture and venulation, striately (5-)7- 15-nerved, commonly ciliolate; corolla-lobes often pubemlent extemally; body of pod 40-60 x 3-3.5 mm, 8-12-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 1-4 mm, the valves appressed-setose.
In cerrado and disturbed forest or cerradao, 200-710 m, apparently local within the range of subsp. viscida s. of the Amazonian Hylaea and w. into Bolivia: Sa. do Grao Mogol in n.-centr. Minas Gerais; valley of rio das Ondas near 12°10'S in transfranciscan Bahia; Parnaiba valley in lat. 7°-8°S in Piaui; valley of rio das Lontras near 7°S in n. Goias; to be expected in Mato Grosso; on the Guapore-Paraguay divide near 17°S in s.-e. Bolivia.-Fl.
I-IV(-?).
Map 41.
This stands in relationship to eglandular var. viscida as does var. lupulina to var. lasiocarpa.
Its sporadic occurrence within the range of var. viscida suggests that it may consist of a set of parallel mutations generating dilated floral bracts with stipuliform, striately nerved blades.
Until this hypothesis can be tested var. velascoensis deserves some taxonomic rank, but certainly not independent of M. somnians sensu lato.
276/IV. Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. longipes (Bameby) Bameby, stat. nov. M. somnians var. longipes Bameby, Brittonia 37: 144.
1985, sens, parum ampliat.—Typus sub var. longipede indicatur.
In habit resembling var. viscida, the stems virgately erect from xylopodium 4-20 dm, either unarmed subglabrous or remotely aculeate and glandular-setose, simple or paniculate and efoliate distally; lf-stks of lvs at mid-stem 10-19 cm, the petiole 7-14 cm; pinnae 2-5-jug., the rachis of longer ones (2.5-)3-6 cm, their lfts to 3 0 ^ 7 - jug. and to (2-)2.5-7 mm long; floral bracts elliptic or lanceolate 0.6-2 mm, 1-5-nerved; calyx 0.9-1.6 mm, the deUcately striate tube 0.7-1 mm, unequally 2-4-toothed, the longest tooth ovate 0.3-0.6 mm; corolla 3.1-4 mm; pods (of var. longipes) ±60 x 5 mm and ± 6-seeded, at base attenuate into a stipe 1 cm, the valves glabrous, the elUptic articles 11-13 mm.
The subsp. longipes is weU differentiated from other forms of M. somnians by slenderly longpetiolate leaves and by relatively large and firmtextured, unequally toothed calyx.
The elongate articles of the pod, at present known only in var. longipes, are equally notable.
The small known range of subsp. longipes lies within that of subsp. viscida var. viscida, which otherwise resembles it except that the stems are never aculeolate as in var. possensis.
Key to varieties of subsp. longipes I. Stems subglabrous unarmed 4-9 dm; bracts at mid-capitulum 0.6-1 mm 1-nerved; e. slope of Espigao Mestre in Bahia, lat. H^-O^S 276/IVa. var. longipes (p. 460).
1.
Stems densely stipitate-glandular and remotely aculeolate 10-20 dm; bracts at mid-capitulum 1-2 mm 3-5-nerved; w. slope of Espigao Mestre in Goias, lat. ± 13°30'S 276/IVb. var. possensis (p. 460).
276/IVa.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. longipes (Bameby) Bameby var. longipes.
M. somnians var. longipes Bameby, 1985, I.e., sens, str.—"Brazil.
Bahia: 7 km S of rio Piau, ±150 km SW of Barreiras, 850 m, 13 Apr 1966 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 14697.''-Holotypus, UB!; isotypi, G! K! LE! NY! P! R! S! US! Characters (including pod) of the subsp., as modified by key to vars.
In cerrado, 600-850 m, local on e. slope of Espigao Mestre, on upper rios das Ondas and Corrente in lat. 12°-13°S in transfranciscan Bahia, BrazU.-H. III-V. 276/IVb.
Mimosa somnians Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. longipes (Bameby) Bameby var. possensis Bameby, var. nov., a var. longipede caulibus elatis 1-2 m copiose glanduloso-setosis aculeisque dissitis armatis, necnon capituli bracteolis majusculis 1-2 mm longis 3-5-nerviis diversa. —Brazil.
Goias: cerrado along rio da Prata near Posse, 800 m, 10.
IV.I966 (fl), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 14586. —Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, NY, R, US. Characters (except the pod, yet unknown) of the subsp., as modified by key to vars.
In cerrado, near 850 m, local on w. slope of Espigao Mestre at ± 13°S in e.-centr. Goias.—Fl.
IV-V(-?).
277.
Mimosa glaucula Bameby, Brittonia 37: 143.
1985.—"BrazU.
Bahia: Lagoa Itaparica 10 km W of Sao Inacio-Xique-xique road at the tuming 13.1 km N of Sao Inacio, 300-400 m, 26 Feb 1977 (fl), R. M. Harley (with Mayo, Storrs, Santos & Pinheiro) 19117.''-Holotypus, CEPEC 231531; isotypi, K! = NY Neg. 11669, NY! Slender,fimctionaUyherbaceous subshrub with proximally subterete but distally low-ribbed, remotely antrorse-aculeolate, distantly leafy simple stems ± 1 m passing upward into a leafless pseudoraceme ±1.5-2 dm of subglobose capitula, glabrous except for ciliolate stipules, floral bracts and minutely ciliolate lfts, the latter thicktextured bicolored, pale olivaceous veinless above, glaucescent and coarsely pallid-venulose beneath.
Stipules erect ovate 1.5-2.5 x 1-1.3 mm, 5-7-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of major cauline lvs 20-38 mm, the petiole 15- 30 X 0.3-0.5 mm, the one interpinnal segment 4-9 mm, the distal lvs much shorter and conjugate-pinnate (no further described); pinnae 2-jug., the distal pair a little longer, the rachis 10-18 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments ± 1- 1.4 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 7-11-jug., the small first pair 0.8-1.1 mm distant from ovate paraphyllidia 0.25-0.4 mm, the blades oblong obtuse from obtusangulate base, those near mid-rachis 4-7.5 X 1-1.8 mm, ±4 times as long as wide, on dorsal face 3(-4)-nerved from pulvinule, the distally centric midrib 2-3-branched on each side upward from near mid-blade, two lateral nerves submarginal ascending to beyond mid-blade, the posterior outer one very short or obscure.
Peduncles mostly geminate 10-15 mm; capitula without filaments 5-6 x 5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the striate-venulose fl-buds obovoid; bracts spatulate-oblanceolate 1-1.2 x 0.6 mm, ± 5-nerved, glabrous dorsally, persistent;yZovv^r^ 4-merous 8-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx membranous campanulate 0.4-0.5 mm, the subtmncate rim minutely ciliolate with plain or a few gland-tipped hairs; corolla turbinate 2.6- 3 mm, glabrous, the firm ovate, intemally concave reddish lobes ± 1.2 x 0.7 mm, striately 9- 11-nerved; filaments pink, monadelphous around base of ovary, exserted 4.5-6.3 mm; ovary glabrous; pod unknown.
In open sandy places at 300-400 m, known only from the type-locality on w. slope of Sa. do Aguma, near 42°45'W, 11°S in n.-w. Bahia, BrazU.-Fl. ii-ni(-?).
Close kinship between M. glaucula and M. somnians is manifest in venation of leaflets and striate corollas.
The form of M somnians most nearly resembling M. glaucula is its var. leptocaulis.
This shares with M. glaucula a rudimentary, commonly eglandular pubescence and relatively short pinnae, but is never even remotely aculeolate and has leaflets at least twice as many and less than half as large.
The extremely slender M. leptorachis, with pinna-rachis reduced yet further to less than one centimeter in length, differs as well in leaf-formula of iii-iv/3-7 (not ii/ 8-11) and in a leafy paniculate, not pseudoracemose efoliate inflorescence.
278.
Mimosa somnambulans Bameby, sp. nov., habitu toto et praecipue corolla glabra striatim nervulosa M. somnianti manifeste proxima et caulibus inermibus cum ejus var. laevigata melius comparabilis, sed foliolis ampliatis (majoribus 12-17 x 2^.5, nec 3.5-6.5 x 0.6- 1.3 mm usque) necnon inflorescentia aperte paniculata diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Sa. da Atalaia, ±25 km by road s.-w. of Monte Alegre de Goias, 12.
III. 1973 (fl), W. R. Anderson (with Kalin Arroyo, Hill, Reis dos Santos & Souza) 6892. -Holotypus, UB; isotypi, K, NY, R, US. Slender, openly branched, distantly but amply leafy shrubs to 2.5 m, the smooth terete branches and lower lvs glabrous, the stems distally, peduncles and axes of paniculate, well-exserted inflorescence viscid-hispidulous with fine glandtipped setulae 0.2-0.7 mm, the lfts mostly quite glabrous, rarely remotely ciliolate, the globose capitula as in M. somnians sensu lato.
Stipules stiffly erect, narrowly lance-attenuate 4-7 x 0.5- 1 mm, mostly 3-5-nerved, glabrous dorsally, ciliolate.
Leaf-stalks of lvs below panicle 8-11.5 cm (some distal lvs shorter, no further described), the petiole 4-5.5 cm, at middle 0.6-0.9 mm diam., the longer interpiimal segments 2- 4.5 cm; a spicule 0.4-1.5 mm between each pair of pinnae; pinnae (2-)3^-jug., the rachis of longer ones 5-10 cm, the longer interfoUolar segments 2-4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 18-34-jug., in outline oblong obtuse from inequilateraUy rounded base, the larger ones 12-17 x 2-4.5 mm, all 4-6-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric, giving rise on each side to (3-)4-5 narrowly ascending secondary venules, the anterior primary nerve submarginal and produced almost to blade apex, the outer posterior ones shorter, all slenderly prominulous dorsaUy.
Peduncles mostly 2-3 per node, 12-18 mm; capit- 462 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 ula without filaments ±4.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts membranous obovate-elliptic 0.5-0.9 mm, remotely ciliolate, 1-nerved; y/ow^r^ 4-merous 8-androus glabrous, the staminate proximal ones a little smaller than the bisexual distal ones; calyx campanulate subtmncate 0.4 mm; corolla turbinate 1.7-2.4 mm, the ovate obtuse, shallowly concave, striately venulose lobes 0.7-1.1 mm; filaments pink, free, exserted 4-5 mm; pod and seed unknown.
About granitic outcrops in mesophytic forest at ±600-800 m, known only from steep slopes of Sa. da Atalaia near 13°20'S, 47°20'W in e.- centr. Goias, BrazU.-n. II-IV(-?).
The affinity of M. somnambulans to M. somnians expressed in similarity of habit, foliage and floral stmcture is so close that the only question confronting the taxonomist is the rank to which it is entitled.
Because the plant is unarmed but glandular-setulose, it is best compared with M. somnians var. leptocaulis.
The ample leaflets, which are more than twice the size of any encountered among the multitudinous races of var. leptocaulis (or elsewhere in M. somnians) and as a consequence more elaborately venulose, together with stipules narrower and fewer-veined and a more diffusely branched and further exserted panicle of pseudoracemes contribute to a strongly individual facies.
I provisionally evaluate M. somnambulans as standing outside the orbit of its racially complex relative (and likely precursor) M. somnians, and suppose it to be a microspecies recently derived by saltatory evolution from it.
279.
Mimosa monacensis Bameby, sp. nov., M. poculatae et M. somniantis subspeciei somnianti arete affinis et cum priori olim a cl.
Bentham. confusa, sed ab ilia caulibus aculeatis (nec inermibus) villisque una cum setulis glandulosis dense conspersis (nec parce simpUciter pilosulis), ab hac caulibus diffusis subherbaceis, bracteis fforalibus dilatatis striato-nervulosis (capitulo ideo strobiliformi), ab ambabus foliomm omnium pinnis exacte bijugis satis differre videtur.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Vao do Parana, IX. 1818 (fl, fr), C. F. P. von Martius 7 79i. -Holotypus (2 sheets), M = NY Negs.
11546, 11547.
Subshrubs, apparently functionally herbaceous from woody roostock, the weakly branched, pliantly humifuse, distantly leafy stems armed with weak scattered recurved intemodal aculei ±1-1.5 mm and, together with lf-axes and peduncles, viscid-villosulous with fine short simple hairs mixed with erect gland-tipped setulae ±0.5- 1 mm, the foliage bicolored, the plane lfts dull brown above, beneath dull olivaceous paler, glabrous on both faces or some pubemlent beneath, all thinly ciliolate, the early peduncles solitary in distal If-axils but later ones pseudoracemose exserted.
Stipules erect, ovateor lance-acuminate 2-4 X 1-1.8 mm, striately several-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2.5-4.3 cm, the petiole 2-3.5 cm, at middle 0.4-0.6 mm diam., the one interpinnal segment 5-9 mm; a lance-subulate subherbaceous spicule 0.8-1.3 mm between proximal pair; pinnae exactly 2-jug., the distal pair a little longer, the rachis of these 2.2-3 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-2.5 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 11-16-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the proximal pair unequal and 1-2.4 mm distant from minute paraphyllidia, all in outline Unear-oblong obtuse from obtusangulate base, those near mid-rachis 6.5-9 x 1.5-2 mm, 4-5 times as long as wide, veinless above, beneath pallidly 4-5-nerved from pulvinule, the centric costa 2-3-branched near and beyond midblade.
Peduncles 1-2 per node, 14-17 mm; capitula globose, without filaments ±5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts ovate 2-2.5 x 1.2-1.5 mm, striately 9-11-nerved, thinly pilosulous, persistent, the lowest ones irregularly connate into an involucroid collar; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate 0.2 mm glabrous; corolla turbinate ±2.5 mm, the firm striate-nerved lobes ±1.3 X 0.8 mm, thinly pilosulous dorsally; filaments eight, not seen complete.
Pods one per capitulum erect, the stipe 7-11 mm, the linear, distally attenuate body 3.5-5 x 0.4 cm, 6-10- seeded, the shallowly undulate replum 0.3-0.4 mm wide, the pallid papery valves breaking when ripe into buUately biconvex oblong-elUptic articles 4.5-6 mm long, the replum and valves alike glandular-setulose overall and the valves in addition thinly pilosulous and yellowish-setulose; ripe seeds not seen.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be expected in cerrado near or above 700 m, known only from the type-locality on the sources of rio Carinhanha, near 15°S in extreme n.-w. comer of Minas Gerais, BrazU.-R. VIII-IX. The description of M. monacensis is prepared from specimens misidentified by Bentham as M. bijuga (Benth.,
non Veil.,
now M. poculata), specimens which incidentally provided the fmiting characters assigned to M. bijuga in Flora Brasiliensis.
They resemble M. poculata in dilated stipuliform floral bracts, of which the lowest are irregularly fused into an involucral collar; but differ in trailing aculeate stems charged with fine villi and many viscid setules, and in pubescent flowers.
The indumentum of mixed prickles, stipitate glands and simple hairs suggests a more direct connection with M. somnians subsp. somnians, but this is normally shmbby prior to anthesis, has (like M. bijuga, despite its epithet) more than two pairs of pinnae in mature cauline leaves, and minute 1- or faintly 3-nerved floral bracts.
The epithet monacensis celebrates the illustrious Bavarian botanists who conceived and contributed to Flora Brasiliensis.
280.
Mimosa poculata Bameby, nom. nov., based on M. bijuga Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 398.
1842, hom. illeg.—"Piauhy, Gardner, n. 2133."
, the data expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 376.
1876: ".
.
. inter Boa Esperanza et S. Antonio [near present Jaic6s].
.
.
."
— Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)! = IPA Neg. 1289 = NY Neg. 1305, 11632; isotypi, ^B = F Neg. 1305\ BM! F! G! GH! NY (hb. Meisner.)! P! W!-NonM. bijuga VeUozo, Ic.
11: t. 32.
1829.
M. bijuga sensu Bentham, 1875: 425, ex parte, exclus. pi. mart.
M. viscida sensu Bentham, 1876: 374, min. ex parte, quoad Burchell 9011.
Slender unarmed subshrubs ±3.5-5 dm, the purplish-brown stems, stipules, lf-axes and peduncles thinly pilose with fine spreading pallid or mfous setae to ±0.8-2 mm, sometimes resinous but not stipitate-glandular, the stems leafy to middle or beyond, passing upward into a loose pseudoraceme of plumply ovoid or globose capitula, the concolorous, olivaceous or brownishlivid lfts glabrous on both faces or pubemlent distally, finely cUiolate.
Stipules firm lanceor ovate-acuminate (1.5-)2.5-6 x 0.8-2 mm, striately nerved distally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 4-7 cm, the dorsally rounded, ventrally shaUowsulcate petiole 2-3.5 x 0.4-0.7 mm, the interpinnal segments (5-)8-21 mm, the sulcus interrupted between pinna-pairs by a lanceolate spicule; pinnae 2-4 jug., the distal pair longest, their rachis 2-3.4 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1-2 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 12-30-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the first pair 0.7-1.3 mm distant from small subulate paraphyllidia, the plane chartaceous blades linear from obtusangulate base, obtuse or obscurely deltate-apiculate, those at and above mid-rachis 5-9 X 1-1.5 mm, 5-6.6 times as long as wide, all smooth above, beneath prominently 3(—4)-nerved from pulvinule, the centric midrib 2-3-branched from middle upward.
Peduncles solitary and 2-3-nate, 9-21 mm; capitula without filaments 5-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts firm brown, striately venulose, dimorphic, the lowest 1.3-2 mm long and nearly as broad, irregularly connate into a shallow-cupular glabrous involucre, the rest obovate-elliptic navicular ±1.7-3 X 1.2-1.5 mm, free, nidulating the yoimg fl-buds, ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx membranous cupular 0.4 mm, the rim undulately tmncate; corolla firm, striately venulose from base, 3.5-3.8 mm, the tube narrowly turbinate, the lance-ovate lobes 2 x 0.7-1 mm, filaments pink, monadelphous through ±0.5 mm, exserted 5-5.5 mm.
Pods one or few per capitulum, stipitate, the stipe 4-6 mm, the linear body 50-60 X 3.5 mm, the replum ±0.5 mm wide, hispid on back and sides with erect setae to 1- 1.5 mm, the papery valves likewise thinly setose and minutely pubemlent, disarticulating like those of M. somnians.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be expected in cerrado or perhaps taboleiro below 500 m, known from scattered stations in n.-centr. Goias (lat. 7°30'-12°S) and e.-centr. Piaui (lat. 7°-8°30'S), BrazU.-n. XI-III. Mimosa poculata is one of several minor, geographically restricted satellites of the M. somnians complex, essentially like M. somnians var. leptocaulis except for the broad floral bracts, the lowest united into a cupular involucre.
It is also very close to M. somnians var. velascoensis, but has fewer pinnae and larger floral bracts.
The pod described by Bentham is taken from Martius 1793 (M), here referred to M. monacensis.
281.
Mimosa leptorachis Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 434.
1875 & in Martius, R. bras. 15(2): 376, descr. ampliat.
1876.-"Habitat inter arbusta in deserto Frio versus flumen S. Francisco, provinciae Minas Geraes: Martins."
-Holotypus, M (3 sheets)! one = F Neg. 6189.
Slender unarmed, diffusely branched shrubs of unknown stature, glabrous except for very few random glsmd-tipped trichomes less than 0.2 mm on some young flowering branchlets, the stems smooth lustrous purplish-brown, the lvs brownolivaceous concolorous when dry, the small globose capitula solitary or rarely geminate in Ifaxils of all distal branchlets, together forming an open leafy panicle.
Stipules firm livid, narrowly ovate 1-2 mm, obscurely several-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks very slender subterete 1.5- 4.5 cm, the petiole 7-24 mm, at middle 0.2-0.25 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 3- 5.5 mm, the ventral groove intermpted between each pinna-pair by a spicule 0.25-0.5 mm; pinnae 3-6-jug., slightly decrescent proximally, the rachis ofdistal ones 3-6(-7) mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 5-9- jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.7-1 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.1-0.2 mm, all in outline narrowly oblong-oblanceolate from abruptly angulate base, broadly obtuse, those near mid-rachis 3- 4.5 X 0.7-1.3 mm, ±3-4 times as long as wide, the firm plane blades 3(-4)-nerved from pulvinule, the distally subcentric midrib pinnately 2-branched on each side, the venation bluntly prominulous pallid beneath, scarcely perceptible above.
Peduncles 11-15 mm; capitula without filaments 4.5-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts submembranous elliptic-obovate 0.4-0.6 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some proximal ones smaller and staminate; calyx membranous campanulate 0.3 mm, the rim microscopically erose; bisexual corollas turbinatecampanulate ±2.1 mm, the firm, striately several-nerved, shaUowly concave lobes ±1.2 x 0.75 mm; filaments free, presumably pink, exserted 5-6 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous; pod unknown.
Reported from shmb thickets, presumably in cerrado cUmax, to be sought on the crest and w. slope of Sa. do Espinha90 in n.-centr. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-F. VII-VIII(-?).
Mimosa leptorachis, coUected once in 1818 and not since seen, is a small satellite or derivative of polymorphic M. somnians and diflerent from all forms of it in short paucifoliolate pinnae.
Bahian M. glaucula approaches it in leaflet-number, but has only two pairs of pinnae per leaf and is an altogether smaUer subshmb.
The type-locality, if correctly recorded (as was not always the case) by Martius, should be somewhere on the west slope of Sa. do Espinha^o between Contendas and the S. Francisco river.
When the pod is discovered the status ofM. leptorachis in relation to M. somnians will require reassessment.
282.
Mimosa calliandroides Hoehne, Com. lin. telegr., Bot. 12: 8, t. 183.
1922.-"No.
2025, Kuhlmann, Pouso [Primeiro] de Fevreiro, margens do Cautario, Rondonia, noroeste de Matto-Grosso [±64°W, 12°S], em Fevreiro de 1919."—Holotypus, SP (?,
not seen); isotypus, RB! = NY Neg. 722^^.
Slender erect unarmed, amply microphyllidious subshrubs attaining ± 1(-?) m, the stems with Ifand inflorescence axes charged with lanceolate or triangular, dorsiventrally compressed scalelike trichomes (setae) to 0.7-1.5 mm, wholly eglandular, the small crowded lfts glabrous subconcolorous, the inflorescence an efoUate or proximally few-lvd panicle of small globose capitula rising ±1-2 dm above foliage.
Stipules firm erect, triangular or lance-acuminate 1.5- 4 X 0.7-1.5 mm, striately several-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 3-10 cm, the petiole including hard pulvinus 2-4 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-10 mm, the narrow shaUow ventral sulcus bridged between each pinna-pair and there charged with a lanceolate subherbaceous spicule 1-1.5 mm; ;7z>2^2a^ oflarger lvs 7-14-jug., the axis of longer ones 2.5-3.3 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 35-50- jug., subvertically imbricate, the blades linear obtuse or subapiculate, the larger ones 2.5- 4.5 X 0.5-0.8 mm, 4.3-6.4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath faintly 4-5-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib 1-2 branched near and above middle, the inner posterior and inner anterior nerves produced beyond mid-blade, the 1-2 outer ones much shorter.
Peduncles solitary or 2-5 per node, 6-16 mm; capitula without filaments 4.5-5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the ellipsoid obtuse fl-buds either glabrous or minutely puberulent; bracts ovate or lanceolate 0.35-0.7 mm; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some lower ones often staminate; calyx campanulate 0.5-0.7 mm, finely ± 16-nerved, the minutely denticulate and ciUoMIMOSA BRACHYCARPA • MIMOSA BRACHYCARPOIDES O MIMOSA CALLIANDROIDES 3 MIMOSA DORMIENS # MIMOSA SCABERRIMA © MAP 42.
Part of Mexico, Central America, and tropical South America.
Ranges ofM brachycarpa Bentham, M. brachycarpoides Bameby, M. calliandroides Hoehne, M. dormiens Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, and M. scaberrima Hoehne. late orifice often a little oblique; corolla turbinate, proximally attenuate, 2.2-3 mm, the firm lance-ovate lobes 1.3-1.8 x 0.7-0.9 mm, at middle 6-7-nerved; filaments lilac-pink, at base united into a stemonozone 0.3-0.5 mm, exserted 4-6 mm.
Pods stiffly ascending, 1-5 per capitulum, in profile undulately linear, straight, attenuate at base but not truly stipitate, abmptly shortbeaked, the longer ones 30-50 x 3.5-4 mm, 7- 10-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.5- 0.6 mm diam., the replum and stiffly papery valves alike densely strigose overall with appressed setulae to 0.4-1 mm, the valves buUately elevated over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling biconvex articles 4.5-5.5 mm long. In savanna below 350 m, apparently local in the upper Madeira-Mamore basin in s.-e. Amazonas (mun. Humaita) and Terr, de Rondonia (Guajara-mirim; rio Cautario), Brazil.-Fl.
IIVI.
Map 42.
Among immediate relatives of M. somnians with striate coroUa-lobes M. calliandroides is weU distinguished by the squamiform basifixed setae of the stems and by dispersal in southwestern Amazonia.
283.
Mimosa surumuensis Harms, Notizbl.
Bot. Gart.
Berlin-Dahlem 6: 304.
1915.-"Brasilien: Rio Branco, Gebiet des Surumu, auf Felsen bei der Serra do Mel (ULE n. 8131—Juli 1909 .
.
.)."-Holotypus, +B = F Neg. 7^i9!; isotypi, G! NY! RB! US! M. surumuensis sensu Ducke, 1949: 57.
Stiffly branched microphyUidious shrubs 0.5- 2.5(-4) m, either unarmed or randomly armed with broad-based, straight or subdecurved aculei 1.5-4.5 mm, the older defoliate stems dark gray or blackish, the homotinous branchlets, lf-stks and peduncles shaggy-tomentulose with msty (when old gray) plumulose setae to 0.5-1.4 mm, the subconcolorous brown-olivaceous imbricated lfts thinly finely gray-pubemlent dorsally and ciliolate, the smaU ovoid or globose capitula solitary and 2-3 together in axil of coevally expanding lvs of a terminal pseudoraceme and of many short lateral branchlets, forming a narrow pyramidal panicle leafy throughout in fruit.
Stipules erect castaneous or brownish, lanceor triangular-acuminate 1.5-4 X 0.5-2 mm, striately several-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of primary cauline lvs (2-)3-7 cm, of some simplified distal lvs only 0.5-1 (-2) cm, the petiole including pulvinus 1.5-4 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 1.5-7 mm, the ventral groove concealed by setulose vesture, interrupted between each pinna-pair by an ascending lance-subulate pubemlent spicule 0.4-1 mm; pinnae of primary lvs 5-1 l(-12)-jug. (of some bracteiform lvs l-^- jug., no further described), proximally decrescent, the rachis of longer ones 13-32 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.2-0.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (22-)25-36-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the small first pair 0-0.5 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades linear from deltately auriculate base, obtuse or minutely mucronulate at apex, the longer ones (2-)2.3-4.6 X 0.35-0.6 mm, 5-7.5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, the very slender subcentric, simple or faintly 1-2-branched midrib immersed or tenuously prominulous beneath.
Peduncles 6-1A mm; capitula without filaments (3.5-)4-8 X (3.5-)4-5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid obtuse fl-buds gray-pilosulous; bracts lance-elliptic 0.8-1.6 x 0.3-0.6 mm, 3-6 nerved, pilosulous dorsally, glabrous within, persistent; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, all seen bisexual; calyx turbinate-campanulate 0.6-1.4 mm, the 12-nerved tube glabrous externally, the triangular teeth 0.25-0.7 mm, ciliolate; corolla turbinate 1.6-1.8 mm, the membranous ovate, shallowly concave 7-10-nerved lobes 0.7- 0.9 X 0.6-0.8 mm; filaments pale pink or whitish, free to base, exserted 4.5-6 mm.
Pods 1-10 per capitulum, sessile or cuneately substipitate, in profile undulately linear 12-24 x 2.5-3 mm, 3-6-seeded, the shaUowly constricted replum and valves alike densely hispid-pilose with erect or loosely recurved plumulose setae to 0.6-1.5 mm, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling, individuaUy dehiscent articles 3.5-5 mm long; seeds obUquely basipetal, plumply compressed-obovoid-ellipsoid 2.4-2.7 X 1.6-1.8 mm, the smooth testa light brown or fuscous.
On rock outcrops in savanna and on cUffledges, ±300-600 m, localized on headwaters of rio Branco in Terr, do Roraima, Brazil (Sas. do Mel and do Sol s. to Sa.
Grande in lat. 2°30'-4°45'N) and immediately adj. Guyana (Ireng valley); apparently disjunct near 7°N on n. slope of Cerro BoUvar in Bolivar, Venezuela.-Fl.
VI, X-I(-?), the full season unknown.
As realized by Harms, M. surumuensis is closely related to M. somnians.
In general aspect it simulates M. somnians subsp. lasiocarpa, from which it is distinguished principally by the plumosesetose indumentum of stems and leaf-stalks.
About half the specimens seen, among them the type, are unarmed, the rest randomly armed with pungent infrastipular prickles.
The ffowers are described as pale pink or whitish in Brazil, white at the one known Venezuelan station.
Possibly the filaments are pink when first expanded and fade whitish.
Neither prickles nor ffower-color are associated with other characters.
284.
Mimosa brachycarpa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 410.
1842.-"Serra da Lapa [in Sa. do Espinha^o n. of Belo Horizonte, centr. Minas Gerais, Riedel, misit] Langsdorff."
— Holotypus, Riedel 17=715, collected XI. 1824 (fl, fr), LE! = NY Neg. 77675; isotypi.
A! K! US! M. brachycarpasensuBentham, 1875: 435, 1876: 377.
M. lupulina sensu Bentham, 1876: 377, ex parte, quoad Gardner 3133, caeteris exclusis.
Erect, usually unarmed but at times randomly or remotely aculeate, stiffly branched shrubs 1- 2 m, the young stems, lf-axes and pods densely strigose or hispid with basally thickened, either short subappressed or longer flagelliform-attenuate (then shaggy) setae to 0.5-2.5 mm, the old tmnks to 5-6 mm diam., the simple virgate hornotinous ones clothed in narrowly ascending, distally diminished lvs, the shortly pedunculate subglobose capitula at first axiUary and immersed in foliage, but later forming an exserted pseudoraceme.
Stipules broadly lanceolate or ovate, acute or acuminate 3-6 x 1.5-2.5 mm, the dry brown, closely striate-venulose blade glabrous on both faces, ciliate.
Leaves subsessile, heteromorphic: a) primary cauline with 5-10 pairs, and b) shorter distal ones with 2-5 pairs of pinnae; lf-stks stout stiff 1-5.5 cm, the longer interpinnal segments 2.5-6 mm; between each pair of pinnae a papery triangular-ovate-acuminate scale (dilated spicule) 1-1.8 mm resembling a diminished stipule; rachis of longer pinnae 1-2 cm, the interfoliolar segments to 0.3-0.8 mm; paraphyllidia 0; lfts 18-30-jug., the small proximal ones next to pulvinus, the blades in sleep subvertically imbricate, in outline linear obtuse, the longer ones 2.5-4.5 x 0.4-0.7 mm, all when dry brownish and veinless above, beneath olivaceous, the finely prominulous centric midrib weakly ± 2-branched on each side.
Peduncles often solitary, sometimes 2-3 per node, 3-20 mm; capitula squatly ovoid or globose, prior to anthesis conelike, without filaments 5-7 mm diam.; bracts resembling stipules in texture and striate venulation, ovate or lanceolate from cuneate base, those near mid-capitulum 2- 3 X 0.6-1.4 mm, all glabrous dorsally ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, a few of the lowest often smaller and staminate; calyx campanulate 0.35-0.6 mm, its tmncate or shallowly denticulate rim ciliolate; corolla glabrous turbinate 2- 2.6 mm, the almost plane ovate lobes 0.7-1.2 mm, striately 9-11-nerved; filaments pink, free, exserted 5-7 mm.
Pods several per capitulum, ascending in a subumbellate cluster, sessile or almost so, in profile oblong-eUiptic abruptly mucronate 12-18 X 4-6 mm, (2-)3-5-seeded, the replum ±0.5 or rarely to 1 mm wide, the papery, densely setose valves coUiculate over each seed, when ripe deciduous in one piece from the longpersistent replum; seeds ±3.5-3.8 x 2.4 mm, the testa lustrous dark brown.
In cerrado, at edge of gallery woodland and in wet campo, sometimes becoming colonial on road-cuts, 350-950 m, discontinuously dispersed in two phytogeographically distinct sectors of the Brazilian Planalto: valleys of rios Araguaia and Tocantins s.-ward from 7°S in Goias and adj. Mato Grosso, e. to sources of rio Parnaiba in far s. Piaui; and on Sa. do Espinhafo between 16°30' and 19°30'S in Minas Gerais. - Fl.
X-VIII, perhaps intermittently through the year.
Map 42.
At anthesis M. brachycarpa closely resembles the bracteose varieties of M. somnians, but may be distinguished by dissection of the ovary, which contains not more than six ovules (vs. 7-15 for M. somnians).
In fruit the striate corolla marcescent at base of the short subsessile pod, the valves of which fall away from the replum without articulation, is an unmistakable combination.
The low ovule-number is compensated by the number of pods that reach maturity, these usually forming an umbelUform head reminiscent of M. camporum.
285.
Mimosa microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1039.
1806.- Typus infra sub var. microcephala indicatur.
Amply microphyllidious shrubs l-4(-5) m, armed or not and in habit from free-standing and either erect or diffuse to sarmentose or vinelike, the stiff livid-brown stems in subsp. microcephala unarmed, in subsp. cataractae erraticdMy armed on some or all intemodes and also along back of lf-stks with usually recurved, sometimes straight, spreading or antrorse aculei l-2.5(—4) mm, in both subspp. the stems, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence coarsely strigose with appressed or narrowly ascending yeUowish-brown setae to 0.5-2 mm attached laterally near or below middle and tapering at each end, these mixed or not with gray pubemlence, the foUage subconcolorous, the narrow, closely imbricate lfts faciaUy glabrous, ciliolate or not, the inflorescence an efoliate or proximally few-lvd pseudoraceme or panicle of pseudoracemes exserted 1-2.5 dm above foliage, the very small globose or eUipsoid capitula fasciculate by 2-5 at each node.
Stipules erect firm, triangular or lanceolate (1-)I.5-5 x 0.6-1.4 mm, either finely 3-5-nerved dorsally or nerveless.
Leaf-stalks of major lvs 7-14(-16) cm, the petiole including firm livid pulvinus 4-21 x 0.8- 1.8 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 3-11 mm, the narrow shallow ventral groove intermpted between each pinna-pair by an ascending linear-lanceolate glabrous or puberulent spicule 0.7-2.4 mm; pinnae of major lvs mostly 10-30-, rarely 7-10-jug., subequUong or a Uttle decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 1.2- 5(-5.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.3- 0.9 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20-60-jug., decrescent only at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.5-1 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades linear or linear-elliptic acute or obtuse, the longer ones (2-)2.3-6.5 x 0.4-0.9 mm, 4-9 times as long as wide, aU veiiUess above, beneath finely 3-nerved, the midrib subcentric, the lateral nerves (faint in young lfts) submarginal, produced nearly to blade apex.
Peduncles very slender 3-11 mm; capitula without filaments 2.5-4.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the ovoid or narrowly ovoid obtuse flbuds either glabrous or puberulent; bracts ovate or lance-subulate 0.4-0.9 x 0.2-0.6 mm, 1 -nerved ciUolate, persistent; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, fragrant; calyx 0.3-0.5 mm, the obscurely or very shortly deltate-lobulate rim either glabrous or minutely cUiolate; corolla (brown or pinkish-brown when dried) turbinate, in some capitula all staminate, in others staminate proximally and bisexual distally, the larger ones 1.6- 2.5 mm, the plane triangular-ovate, 1 - or 3-nerved lobes 0.8-1.3 x 0.55-0.8 mm; filaments either pink fading whitish or white from the first, free to base or almost so, exserted 3.5-5(-7) mm.
Pods ±1-4 per capitulum, sessile or attenuate at base into a pseudostipe, cuspidate at apex, in profile linear, linear-elliptic or undulately linear, when well fertilized (9-)10-60(-90) x 3-5 mm, (2-)3-10(-16)-seeded, the replum 0.35-0.6 mm wide, together with stiffly papery valves strigulose or hispidulous with forwardly ascending or appressed setae to 0.5-1.4 mm and sometimes in addition minutely puberulent, when ripe breaking into rhombic-oblong or elliptic, biconvex, individually dehiscent, free-falling segments 4-7 mm long; seeds plumply lentiform 2.3- 2.8 X 1.7-2.2 mm, the fuscous testa smooth lustrous.
The concept of M. microcephala is here expanded to include aculeate M. cataractae Ducke and analyzed into two geographic subspecies and five varieties.
As indicated by Irwin (1966: 103), the differences in leaf-formula and seed-number (inadvertently reversed in Irwin's discussion) between M. microcephala and M. plumaeifolia Kleinh.,
which is indistinguishable from M. cataractae, are indecisive.
The aculeate plants have been described as relatively taU sarmentose shrubs and the unarmed ones as smaller savanna bushes, but field-labels suggest that in open places such as rock-islets in river rapids the prickly ones can form either stiff free-standing bushes or trailing subshmbs, not materially different, except in presence of aculei, from genuine M. microcephala in comparable habitats.
The close relationship of M. microcephala is with polymorphic M. somnians, likewise either armed or unarmed, from which it differs principally in the 1- or locally 3-nerved, not 5-several-nerved corolla lobes, and in the lateral attachment of the cauline setae, a feature that has passed unnoticed in the literature.
Kindred of more local dispersal and native in similar riverine and outcrop habitats in Amazonia and the Guayana Highland are M. calliandroides, similar in all respects except for dilated and basifixed setae of stems and leaf-stalks, M. surumuensis distinguished by plumose setae, and M. brachycarpoides, similar in setae but different in greatly altered leaf-formula.
Key to varieties of M. microcephala Stems and lf-stks armed; subsp. cataractae; corolla-lobes 1-nerved; filaments white.
2.
Rachis of longer pinnae 3-5.5 cm; prickles of stems sharply recurved; Surinam, French Guiana, and adj. Amapa, Brazil, centr. state of Roraima, Brazil, on lower rio Tapajoz in Para, and in upper rio Madeira basin in Rondonia 285/Ia. var. cataractae (p. 469).
2.
Rachis of longer pinnae 2-3 cm; prickles of stems ascending, straight horizontal, or obscurely recurved; Guayana Highland in Bolivar, Venezuela, Sa.
Tumucumaque in Amapa, Brazil, Com. Guainia, Colombia 285/Ib. var. lumaria (p. 469).
Stems and lf-stks unarmed; subsp. microcephala; corolla-lobes either 1- or 3-nerved; filaments usually pink fading whitish, rarely white from the first.
3.
Pinnae of larger lvs 12-30-jug. and rachis of longer ones 15-22(-30) mm; Venezuela, immediately adj. Colombia (Guainia; Vichada), and n. Brazil (Terr, do Roraima); segments of pod 3.5-6 mm long. 4.
CoroUa-lobes 1-nerved; range as just given 285/IIa. var. communis (p. 469).
4.
CoroUa-lobes 3-nerved; localized along middle Orinoco river in n.-w. Amazonas and adj. Apure and BoUvar, Venezuela, and Vichada, Colombia 285/IIb. var. microcephala (p. 470).
3.
Pinnae of larger lvs 7-9-jug. and rachis of longer ones 3-4.5 cm; upper rio Vaupes in Colombia (Cerro Mitu); segments of pod ±7 mm long 285/IIc. var. mituensis (p. 471).
285/1.
Mimosa microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. cataractae (Ducke) Bameby, stat. nov. M. cataractae Ducke, Arch.
Jard.
Bot. Rio de Janeiro 3: 75.
1922.—Typus infra sub var. cataractae indicatur.
Stems and aU or most lf-stks aculeate; filaments white; pod ± 10-25 mm long, (2-)3-5(-6)- seeded.
S.-e. Venezuela (Bolivar) s.-e. to Sa.
Tumucumaque in n.-w. Amapa and the lower rio Tapaj6s in Para, Brazil.
285/Ia. Mimosa microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. cataractae (Ducke) Bameby var. cataractae.
M. catarac- ^<2^ Ducke, 1922, I.e., sens, str.—"Hab. in ripis fluminis Tapajoz prope cataractam Maranhao Grande, l[egit] A. Ducke 25-6-1918, [MG] n. 17.070."-Holotypus, MG!; isotypi, BM! G! = F Neg. 28203 = NY Neg. 11828, P! R 55201 US! M. plumaeifolia Kleinhoonte, RecueU Trav.
Bot. Neerl.
30: 167 = Meded.
Bot. Mus. Herb. Rijks Univ. Utrecht 5: 5.
1933.—"Surinam: am Oberen Tapahoniflusse, in der Nahe des Teeboeberges, Versteeg 796 (Typus); Versteeg Herh.
Utrecht 31823 . ..; am Coppenameflusse, in der Nahe des Voltsberges, Pulle 266."—Holotypus, U, not seen; paratypus, Pulle 266, NY! M. cataractae sensu Ducke, 1949: 58.
M. adversa sensu Pulle, 1906: 206; non Bentham.
M. plumaeifolia sensulrwin, 1966: 103 (''plumifolia"), max. ex parte, exclus.
Steyermark 89266 quae = var. sequ.
Leaf-stalks of major lvs 7-14 cm, the pinnae (8-) 10-18-jug., inserted up to (5-)6-l 1 mm apart; rachis of longer pinnae 3-5(-5.5) cm; lfts of longer pinnae (33-)40-60-jug., the longer ones 4- 6.5 mm, acute.
Forming free-standing erect or diffuse bushes on rocky shores, islands in river rapids, outcrops in forest, and becoming sarmentose-scandent at forest-margms, 200-500 m, locaUy plentifiU along streams flowing n. from the Wilhelmina Mts. in Surinam and along the upper Oiapock in French Guiana and adj. Amapa, BrazU, disjunct on rio Tapajos at 4°30'S in w.-centr. Para and in centr. Roraima (S. Luiz do Anaua), BrazU.—Fl.
VyIII. —Queue-lezard (French Guiana, appUed also to some prickly Piptadenia spp.).
Map 43.
285/Ib.
Mimosa microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. cataractae (Ducke) Bameby var. lumaria Bameby, var. nov., pinnis foliomm majomm 12-14-jugis rachique suo 2-3 cm tantum longo, necnon foliolis minoribus 2.5-5 x 0.4-0.5 (nec 4- 6.5 X 0.6-0.9) mm usque a var. cataractae diversa.—Venezuela.
Bolivar: Hato la Vergarena, 3 km e. of Cano Azul, 470 m, 23.
X. 1954 (fl), /. /.
Wurdack & N. G. L. Guppy 178.- Holotypus, NY.
In all respects resembling var. cataractae but for fewer and shorter pinnae, somewhat smaller lfts, and aculei straight ascending or obscurely recurved, not sharply hooked; except for armature almost var. communis.
On rocky ridges and outcrops, 200-500 m, apparently local in s.-e. Venezuela (Altoplanicie de Nuria; middle Caroni valley), summit of Sa Tumucumaque in Amapa, Brazil, and on rios Inirida and Negro in Com. Guainia, Colombia.—Fl.
X-II(-?).
Map 43.
285/11.
Mimosa microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. microcephala.
M. microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, 1806, I.e., sens, str.—Typus infra sub var. microcephala indicatur.
Unarmed; filaments commonly pink, rarely white or whitish; pods 25-60(-90) x 3-5 mm, (4_)5_10(-16)-seeded.
Guayana Highland w.-ward from Mt. Roraima to middle Orinoco valley in Venezuela, s. to upper rio Branco in Brazil and w. to upper rio Vaupes in Colombia.
285/IIa.
Mimosa microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. microcephala var. communis Bameby, var. nov., a var. microcephala haud nisi coroUae lobis (ut apud omnes alias speciei formas) 1-nerviis, nec striatim 3-nerviis, diversa.—Venezuela.
Bolivar: quebradas del rio Ambtere, valle de Uriman, Alto Caroni, 500 m, 1.1949 (fl, fr), F. Cardona 2557.—Holotypus, NY; isotypus, VEN.
M. microcephala sensu Bentham, 1876: 384, ex parte.
Leaf-formula xii-xxx/30-50, the rachis of longer pinnae 16-28(-30) mm, the longer lfts to (2-)2.3-4.5 X 0.4-0.8 mm, obtuse; corolla either glabrous or pubemlent, the lobes 1-nerved; filaments pink; pods (weU fertilized) 3-6, exceptionally to 9.5 cm long, 6-10(-16)-seeded.
In rock-savanna, about outcrops, and on rocky streambanks, of apparently bicentric range: locally common at 400-1200 m on and around the Gran Sabana in Bolivar, Venezuela, and around MAP 43.
Northem South America.
Ranges of M. microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow. the headwaters of rio Branco in Terr, do Roraima in Brazil (there perhaps below 400 m); and sympatric with var. microcephala on rock outcrops near and below 200 m along the middle Orinoco in Vichada and Guainia, Colombia and in n.-w. Amazonas and adj. w. Bolivar and Apure, Venezuela.—Fl, IX-V, perhaps sporadically in other months.—Mastranto (Vichada).
Map 43.
285/IIb.
Mimosa microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. microcephala var. microcephala.
M. microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, 1806, I.e., sens, strictiss.—"7/(2^^^ in America meridionali ad Orinocum."
—Holotypus, B-WILLD 19086, seen in Microform! and as F Neg. 1341\; isotypus, labeUed ''1163, Orinoco," P-HBK! M. microcephala sensu Kunth, Mimoses 23, t. 8 (pulcherrima).
1819; Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, 1824: 257; Bentham, 1875; 438, ex parte, 1876:384, ex parte.
Leaf-formula xiv-xxii/20-35, the longer lfts 2- 3.5 X 0.4-0.7 mm, obtuse; corolla minutely pubemlent or subglabrous, the lobes finely prominently 3-nerved; pods ±25-45 x 4 mm, 5-9 seeded.
In savanna thickets and about crystalline outcrops, 70-150 m, locally plentiful along and near the Orinoco River between Sanariapo and Cerro San Borja in n.-w. T. F. Amazonas and immediately adj. Apure and Bolivar, Venezuela; adj. Vichada, Colombia.—Fl. intermittently through the year.
The varieties microcephala and communis are essentially identical except in venulation of the corolla-lobes, a character that bears on the relationship between M. microcephala and M. somnians, not perceived by Bentham.
The var. microcephala has been collected repeatedly, and to the exclusion of var. communis, in the environs of Puerto Ayacucho, but upstream at Sanariapo and downstream on Cerro San Borja the two varieties occur in close proximity, differing, at least at Cerro San Borja, further in color of filaments, pink in var. microcephala (Wurdack & Monachino 39826, NY) and white in var. communis (Wurdack & Monachino 39842, NY, further notable for an extremely long pod with up to 16 articles).
Also present on the crystalline rock-savannas of this sector of the Orinoco is M. somnians var. deminuta, and it seems possible that the venulose corolla-lobes of var. microcephala may be derived by introgressive hybridization from this source.
If other populations of var. communis that are sympatric with var. microcephala have the multiovulate pod of Wurdack & Monachino 39842 they may eventually deserve taxonomic status.
285/IIc.
Mimosa microcephala Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow subsp. microcephala var. mituensis Bameby, var. nov., ab aliis subspeciei suae formis pinnis foliomm majomm 7-9 (nec 12-30)-jugis 3.5^.5 (nec 1.5-3) dm usque longis, leguminisque replo profunde inter segmenta anguste elliptica constricto diversa.—Colombia.
Com. de Vaupes: Cerro Mitu, 4.
IX.1959 (fl, fr), B. Maguire (with C. K Maguire & Alvaro Fernandez) 44104.—Holotypus NY (2 sheets).
Different from other unarmed varieties of M. microcephala in relatively few (to 7-9) pairs of relatively long pinnae; corolla-lobes glabrous 1-nerved; color of filaments not recorded.
Found in the form of arching shmbs at woodland margin, 350 m, known only from Cerro Mitu, near 1°N, 70°W in e. Vaupes, Colombia.— Fl.
VIII-IX(-?).
Map 43.
286.
Mimosa brachycarpoides Bameby, sp. nov., M. microcephalaeetM.surumuensiaffims,huic setis caulinis scaberulis sed haud vero plumulosis propior, a prioris var. communi, quacum coroUae lobulis 1 -nerviis convenit, foliomm pinnis 2-4-, nec (7-)10-30-jugis necnon calyce fere 1 (nec 0.3-0.5) mm longo primo intuitu diversa, a M. surumuensi praeter pinnas paucijugas coroUae lobulis forte 1-, nec striatim 7-10-nerviis absimilis.—Venezuela.
Bolivar: ±30 km n. of Puerto Ayacucho, 100 m, 30.
VI. 1975 (fl), Al Gentry (with Paul Berry) 14714.-Holotypus, MO; isotypi, NY, US. Stiffly branched, unarmed or randomly remotely aculeolate shrubs ± 1.5 m, the livid stems and lf-stks at once densely puberulent and loosely strigose with ascending sordid-orange, basally spurred scabemlous setae 0.5-1.5 mm, the lvs subconcolorous, the densely imbricate lfts olivaceous on both faces, often red-tinged distaUy, glabrous above, beneath puberulent beyond midblade, ascending-ciliolate, the small globose capitula solitary and geminate in virgate, efoliate or proximally leafy-bracteate pseudoracemes exserted 0.5-1.5 dm from foliage.
Stipules erect firm reddish, lanceor ovate-acuminate 2- 4 X 0.5-1.2 mm, 3-5(-7)-nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks of lvs below inflorescence 1.5-3 cm, the petiole 5-10 mm, near middle 0.5-0.9 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 3-6 mm, the obscure ventral sulcus intermpted between pinnae by a stipuliform spicule ±2 mm; pinnae 2-4- jug., strongly accrescent distally, the rachis of distal pair 25-38 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments less than 1 mm; lfts of distal pair of pinnae 26-36-jug., decrescent toward base and at very apex of rachis, the small first pair ±0.5 mm distant from pulvinule (paraphyllidia 0), the blades linear obtuse from deeply blunt-auriculate base, those near mid-rachis 5-7 x 0.7-1 mm, ±6-7 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath faintly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the straight midrib centric, the posterior nerve expiring near mid-blade.
Peduncles 3-6 mm; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the reddish eUipsoid fl-buds thinly pubemlent at tip; bracts firm lance-ovate 0.8-1.2 X 0.5-0.6 mm, persistent; pedicels dmmshaped, broader than long, white-pubescent; flowers 4-merous 8-androus but the calyx of some 5-denticulate; calyx campanulate 0.9-1 mm, the deltate teeth 0.2-0.3 mm, the sinus opposite the bract deeper than the rest; coroUa narrowly campanulate 2.1-2.3 mm, the oblong obtuse, shallowly concave, dorsaUy 1-nerved lobes 0.8- 1 X 0.5 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous at very base below the strigulose ovary, exserted 4 mm; ripe pod unknown, when young subsessile, densely strigose with forwardly appressed setae.
On laja outcrops near 100 m, known only from the Orinoco vaUey at a point about 30 km downstream from Puerto Ayacucho, in far w. Bolivar, Venezuela.-n. VI-VII(-?).
Map 42.
Mimosa brachycarpoides is closely related to compatriot M. microcephala and to M. surumuensis, but differs from both in short, few-pinnate leaves.
Its basally calcarate cauline setae are scabemlous, which suggests affinity to M. surumuensis, but the corolla-lobes are simply 1 -nerved as in M. microcephala var. communis.
From the latter it differs not alone in leaf-formula but also in a relatively large calyx asymmetrically recessed on the side opposed to the bract.
It is an odd circumstance that typical M. microcephala has been collected close to the type-locality of M. brachycarpoides (O. Huber 3788, NY, US), but this is notably different in its elaborate leaves and 3-nerved corolla-lobes.
In general habit and foliage M. brachycarpoides recalls the distantly allopatric M. brachycarpa, but this is safely distinguished, as is M. surumuensis, by striately several-nerved corolla-lobes characteristic of ser. Bipinnatae (sens. str.).
287.
Mimosa scaberrima Hoehne, Com. lin. telegr., Bot. 12: 8, t. 182.
1922.-"No 2023, Kuhlmann, Cataqui-Iamain (Campos dos Urupas), Rondonia [=Cataqueama, ± 11°10'S, 63°10'W], noroeste de Matto-Grosso em Dezembro de 1918."—Holotypus, SP (?,
not seen); isotypus, RB! = NY Neg. 722^7.
Slender erect, unarmed, remotely virgatebranched shrubs of unknown stature, the stems, back of all lf-axes, and peduncles at once shortly pilosulous and densely coarsely strigose with subappressed, narrowly lanceolate, dorsiventrally compressed but basally convex (ecalcarate), proximally scabrous-pubemlent setae to 1.5- 2 X 0.2-0.3 mm, the lfts bicolored, when dry lustrous dark brown and almost veinless above, paler brown and sharply venulose beneath, glabrous on both faces but conspicuously ciliolate, the smaU subglobose capitula fasciculate by 3-4 at nodes of simple efoliate pseudoracemes terminal to branches and exserted 1-2 dm from foliage.
Stipules incurved-erect, firm lance-ovate 2-3 X 0.8-1.4 mm, gray-pilosulous extemally, glabrous striolate within, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of primary cauline lvs to 4 cm, progressively shorter upward, of lvs near base of pseudoraceme only 2-6 mm; interpinnal spicules to 1.5 mm, pubemlent; pinnae of primary lvs 3(-4)-, of upper lvs 2- and 1-jug., when more than 1-jug. accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 3 - 9 cm, the interfoUolar segments ± 1-1.6 mm; lifts of longer pinnae ±30-38-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the small first pair unequal (paraphyllidia 0), the blades narrowly oblong obtuse from bluntly auriculate base, those near midrachis ±6.5-9.5 X 1.2-1.6 mm, aU ±7-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib forwardly displaced to divide blade ±1:2, 2-3-branched from near middle upward, the one anterior nerve narrowly intramarginal, the innermost posterior nerve expiring far beyond mid-blade, the rest progressively shorter.
Peduncles 7-13 mm; capitula without filaments ±4.5-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the prominently 4-keeled ffbuds gray-pilosulous; bracts narrowly lanceolate ±1 X 0.3 mm, 1-nerved, ciliolate, persistent; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx shallowly campanulate, scarcely 0.25 mm, obscurely lobulate, minutely ciliolate but extemally glabrous; corolla narrowly turbinate ±2.2 mm, the narrowly ovate, prominently 1-nerved, concave lobes ± 1.2 x 0.65 mm, thinly pilosulous extemally; filaments pink, free to base, exserted ±2 mm.
Pods 1-few per capitulum, subsessile, in profile undulately linear, straight or almost so, 30-35 x 5.5-6.5 mm, 6- 9-seeded, the replum 0.5-0.8 mm wide, the papery brown valves buUately elevated over each seed, the replum and valves alike coarsely loosely strigose with ascending setae to ±1.5 mm, the valves apparently separating in one piece from replum but plainly marked by partial interseminal fractures into articles ±5-6 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
On rock outcrops in campo, near 600 m, known only from the type-locality near the e. end of Sa. dos Pacaas Novos in centr. Rondonia, Brazil. — H. X-I(-?).
Map 42.
Mimosa scaberrima, not previously affiliated in sect. Habbasia, is closely related to the nearly sympatric M. calliandroides and the remotely allopatric M. brachycarpoides, both of which are similar in growth-habit.
It resembles the first in dilated, although basally only thickened and not spurred cauline setae, but differs from it in few, at most 4 and not to 7-14 pairs of pinnae per leaf, and in the strongly 1-, not 6-7-nerved corolla-lobes.
In leaf-formula and in 1 -nerved corolla-lobes it resembles M. brachycarpoides, but differs in lance-triangular, dorsally flattened ecalcarate, not slender subterete and basally spurred, cauline setae, and in a minute calyx about one tenth, not nearly one half as long as the corolla.
D(v).
Series NEPTUNIOIDEAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Habbasia ser. Neptunioideae Barneby, ser. nov., inter ser. Habbasiam et ser. Bipinnatas ambigens et ambabus proxime affinis, a priori caulibus foliommque rachi saepissime inermibus simulac aut capituUs ante anthesin conoideis aut legumine angusto (3-6 mm lato) oligospermo, a secunda coroUae lobulis 1-nerviis simulac indumenti setis basifixis arte tantum separabilis, ab ambabus autem leguminis replo maturo apice fisso diversa.— Sp. typica: M. neptunioides Harms.
Microphyllidious subshrubs and herbs, the latter sometimes monocarpic, unarmed or randomly armed with weak straight intemodal aculei.
Indumentum of short villi and tapering basifixed, sometimes basally subdilated setae, eglandular (rare minute gland-tipped setulae in some Mexican M. occidentalis).
Stipules ovate or broadlanceolate, amplexicaul or almost so, striately 12-50-nerved.
Leaf-formula (i-)ii-ix/14-38; lfstks spiculate between pinna-pairs; larger lfts 4- 10.5 mm; midrib of lfts subcentric, an anterior and a posterior primary nerve produced to or well beyond mid-blade.
Inflorescence mostly of axillary, ovoid or subglobose capitula, theflssubtended by striately venulose bracts; capitula without filaments 3-9 mm diam.; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx 0.15-0.5 mm, ciliolate or not; corolla 1.4-3 mm, the lobes 1-nerved (the nerve sometimes faintly pinnate); filaments either free or basally monadelphous.
Fruit a sessile or subsessile, linear or narrowly oblong craspedium 3-6 mm wide, (1-)2-7-seeded, the replum 0.3-0.7 mm, at maturity splitting at apex to release the free-falling, individually dehiscent articles.
Spp. four, of campo, savanna and ruderal habitats below 1000 m, two in s.-e. Bolivia and far s.-w. Brazil (s. Amazonas, Rondonia, Mato Grosso), one in tropical Mexico and n. Central America, one discontinuously widespread and weedy from s. Mexico and Lesser Antilles to n.- e. Brazil, the Amazon Basin, and n.-e. Bolivia.
This small group of essentially herbaceous, often precociously flowering and in the case of M. camporum commonly monocarpic mimosas is only feebly separable from closely related series Habbasia and Bipinnatae.
It differs from the majority of the first by armature absent or only weakly developed, and by narrow pauciovulate pods, and from the majority of the second by one-nerved corolla-lobes.
However these contrasts find exceptions in M. (Habbasia) strigillosa, which is often unarmed and has, like the strongly armed M. (Habbasia) dormiens, small few-seeded pods, and in M. (Bipinnatae) microcephala, which has 1-2-nerved corolla-lobes (but these coincident with basally calcarate setae foreign to ser. Neptunioideae).
The feature common to all Neptunioideae is a replum that on maturation of the pod splits at apex into two arms, thereby effecting discharge of the valvular articles and their seeds.
Such discontinuities as exist between ser. Neptunioideae and its two closest relatives are of about equal width.
Strong arguments could be made for the inclusion of ser. Neptunioideae in either ser. Habbasia or ser. Bipinnatae, but logic would then compel the combination of all three into one extremely heterogeneous assemblage.
The arrangement proposed here is, like all compromises, not fully satisfying.
Mimosa camporum.,
the one member of ser. Neptunioideae known to Bentham, was described in the first instance as a Eu-mimosa, but afterward placed (Bentham, 1875: 436) between M. dormiens, with which it has in common small capitula and shortly exserted filaments, and M. strigillosa in sect. Habbasia ser. Asperatae (=Habbasia of this treatment).
Conspectus of ser. Neptunioideae Mimosa * Perennial herbs and weak subshrubs; peduncles 2-7(-9) cm; filaments exserted 7-10 mm.
288. neptunioides Harms 289. cisparanensis Bameby 290. occidentalis Britton & Rose a. var. occidentalis b. var. novo-galiciana Bameby ** Monocarpic herbs; peduncles mostly 4-18 mm; filaments exserted 2-4 mm.
291. camporum Bentham Key to species of ser. Neptunioideae 1.
Perennial herbs or subshmbs; peduncles mostly 20-70(-90) mm; capitula without filaments (8-)9- 15 X 5-9 mm; calyx-tube 0.3-0.5 mm, the rim ciliolate with fine trichomes to 0.15-0.7 mm; corollas 2.2-3 mm; filaments exserted 7-10 mm.
2.
Lf-formula iv-ix/22-36; capitula without filaments (6.5-)7-9 mm diam.; pod 4-5 mm wide; Pacific s. Mexico from Nayarit to Chiapas, e. to s. Veracruz and Belize 290.
M. occidentalis (p. 476).
2.
Lf-formula U-iv/14-24(-25); capitula without filaments 5-7.5 mm diam.; S. America s. of the Amazon R. 3.
Diffiise unarmed; stipules glabrous dorsally; petioles 4-21 mm; interpinnal spicules 0.5-1.1 mm; pod 3-3.5 mm wide, thinly hispid with setae to 1-2.5 mm; s. Amazonas and Rondonia in Brazil, and e. Bolivia 288.
M. neptunioides (p. 474).
3.
Erect and thinly armed with random weak straight intemodal aculei; stipules setose dorsally; petioles reduced to If-pulvinus; interpinnal spicules 2-2.5 mm; pod 6 mm wide, comosely hispid with setae to 4-6.5 mm; s.-centr. Mato Grosso, Brazil 289.
M. cisparanensis (p. 475).
1.
Monocarpic herbs (sometimes basally lignescent in age); peduncles 4-18(-22) mm; capitula without filaments (2-)3-8 x (2-)3-6(-7) mm; calyx-tube 0.15-0.3 mm, the rim usually naked, rarely with 1-2 setulae 0.1-0.2 mm; corollas 1.4-2.2(-2.3) mm; filaments exserted (2-)2.5-4 mm; tropical Mexico (Guerrero to s. Veracruz) and Lesser Antilles s. through Central America, the Orinoco and Amazon basins, and the Guianas to Ceara and Rondonia in Brazil 291.
M. camporum (p. 478).
288.
Mimosa neptunioides Harms in O. Kuntze, Rev. gen. pi. 3(2): 67.
1898.-"Bolivia: 400 m Yapacani."
—Holotypus, O. Kuntze s.n.,
VI. 1892 (fl), +B = F Neg. 7^22!,
isotypi, NY (hb. Kuntze.)! US! M. steinbachii Harms, Notizbl.
Bot. Gart.
Berlin-Dahlem 9: 1038.
1926.—"Bolivia:. .. prov. Buenavista, Dep.
Santa Cmz (J. STEINBACH n. 1016, Januar 1915; n. 1111, Marz 1915).
Campos de Buenavista (STEINBACH n. 2505, April 1916; n. 6963, Marz 1925; n. 7067, April 1925)."—Lectotypus, Steinbach 6963, +B = F Neg. 1438\; isolectotypi, E! G! GH! MO! NY! W!; Syntypi, Steinbach 7067, A! E! GH! MO! NY! Diffusely trailing, essentially unarmed, weakly fmtescent subshrubs from fusiform woody root, the simple or few-branched subcompressed stems 3-9(-?) dm, becoming defoliate proximally, together with lf-axes and peduncles softly hispid, always when young and often permanently, with slender suberect tapering yellowish setae to 2-5 mm and at base ±0.05-0.1 mm diam. (very few, at random, on some stems only, dilated at base to 0.3 mm diam. and setaculeiform), the brownish-oUvaceous, conspicuously stipulate lvs subconcolorous, the lfts glabrous faciaUy, thinly setose-ciliolate, the ellipsoid capitula single in axils of coevaUy expanding lvs near tip of branches, at anthesis shortly emersed but soon afterward lateral.
Stipules semiamplexicaul, ovate from broad subcordate base, obtuse or deltately apiculate 4-11 X 3-5.5 mm, glabrous facially, the brown, at first greenish-tipped blades striately 30-50-nerved, usually weakly setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 1-4 cm, the petiole (3-)5- 21 X 0.4-0.7 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 3-7(-10) mm, the shallow ventral groove charged between pinna-pairs with a subulate or laminulate spicule 0.25-1.1 mm, the terminal appendage of lf-stk resembling a linear-elliptic 1ft; pinnae 2-4-jug., a little accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones 2-5(-6) mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 14-23(-25)-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.6-1.2 mm distant from minute paraphyllidia often reduced to setulose papillae, the blades Unear-oblong or -lanceolate from obtusangulate base, abmptly acute, straight, those at mid-rachis 4-8.5 x 1-1.8 mm, 4-5.3 times as long as wide, all (4-)5-7-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib only a little displaced, 2-5-branched upward from below middle, the nerve adjacent on each side expiring beyond mid-blade, the outer posterior ones much shorter, the erect or widely ascending ciUa (0.4-)l-2 mm.
Peduncles (1-)2- 5(-7) cm; capitula without filaments (8-)9- 15 X 5-7 mm, prior to anthesis conelike, the bracts wholly concealing the fl-buds; receptacle setose; bracts resembling stipules in texture and venulation, elliptic, elliptic-oblanceolate or obovate 2-3.5 X 0.8-2 mm, striately many-nerved, glabrous facially, eWiate; flowers 4-merous 8-anMAP 44.
Mexico, Central America, and tropical South America, and (inset) Mexico and Central America.
Ranges of M camporum Bentham, M. neptunioides Harms, and M. occidentalis Britton & Rose. drous, some proximal ones small and staminate; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate 0.4- 0.5 mm, extemally glabrous, the undulately 4-lobed rim with a few cilia 0.15-0.5 mm; corolla 2.2-3 mm, narrowly turbinate, the membranous, nearly plane ovate lobes 0.85-1.1 x 0.8-0.9 mm, faintly delicately pinnate-veined; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.6-1.4 mm, exserted 7- 8.5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods ±2- 12 per capitulum subsessile, in profile Unear-oblong (8-)12-22 X 3-3.5 mm, (2-)3-6-seeded, the scarcely constricted replum 0.5-0.7 mm wide, the thin papery valves buUately elevated over each seed, like the replum hispid overall with slender tapering, minutely scabemlous lutescent setae 1-2.5 mm, when ripe brown or fuscous, breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 2-4 mm long; seeds subvertically basipetal lentiform 2-2.2 x 2 mm, the smooth testa fuscous sublustrous.
On creek banks and in open sandy campo, gregarious and locally abundant at 400-500 m in the Andean foothills drained by rio Yapacani, near 17°30'S, 63°40'-60'W in s.-centr. Bolivia; and in savanna below 250 m on right affluents of upper rio Madeira in n. Rondonia (mun. Sta. Barbara) and adj. Amazonas (mun. Humaita), Brazil.-Fl.
I-VII, all members of a population flowering simultaneously for one day at intervals of several (Steinbach 7067, NY).
Map 44.
This localized, morphologically well-marked species is related to M. camporum, which is similar in striate stipules and narrow pod but which differs in erect monocarpic growth-habit, smaller capitula, and much less dilated stipules.
Harms made note of this kinship when he described M. steinbachii from Buenavista.
His earlier M. neptunioides, based on meagre starveUng specimens from the Yapacani valley close to Buenavista, had been likened to M. dormiens and perhaps for this reason was overlooked.
The earUest collection of M. neptunioides known to me was collected in BoUvia in the Northem Hemisphere winter of 1830-1831 by the French explorer Alcide C. V. d'Orbigny (717, P).
289.
Mimosa cisparanensis Bameby, sp. nov., ab affini M. neptunioide his signis diversa: caules erecti stricti, intemodiis hinc inde aculeis 1-2 rectis verticalibus armati (nec diffiisi inermes); stipulae dorso setosae (nec glabrae); petioli veri subnulU (nec 4-21 mm longi), pinnamm pari primo juxta pulvinum orienti; spiculae interpinnales herbaceae 2-2.5 (nec 0.5- 1.1) mm longae; leguminis valvulae 6 (nec 3- 3.5) mm latae setis laevissimis (nec minute scabemlis) comoso-hispidae; semina 3-3.5 (nec ± 2) mm longa, oblique descendentia (nec basipeta).
A M. occidentali, specie mexicana et centraliamericana quoad legumina simillima, imprimis foliomm pinnis 2-A (nec 5-10)-jugis, pari primojuxta pulvinum inserto facilius separanda.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso: Mun.
Rosario do Oeste, estrada Cuiaba-Rosario do Oeste, 15 km apos Jangada, 2.
II.1986 (fl, fr), A. M. de Carvalho (with G. P. Lewis) 2187.—Holotypus, NY.
Erect subshrubs ±1 m, randomly armed on some intemodes with 1-2 erect straight weak aculei 1.5-2.5 mm, the simple terete stems, lfaxes and peduncles hispid with suberect tapering yellowish or tawny setae to 2-4 mm and not more than 0.1 mm diam. at base, and in addition finely gray-puberulent, eglandular, the olivaceous, conspicuously stipulate lvs subconcolorous, the lfts glabrous facially, setose-ciliate, the dense ellipsoid capitula single in a long succession of If-axils, at anthesis shortly emersed from coevally expanding foliage but quickly lateral.
Stipules amplexicaul, ovate from broad subcordate base, deltately apiculate, 7-8 x 4-5 mm, thinly setose dorsally, glabrous within, the brown blade striately ±40-50-nerved, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leafstalks 1-2 cm, the petiole reduced to the pulvinus, the longer interpinnal segments 5-8 mm, the ventral sulcus interrupted between pinna-pairs by a laminulate spicule 2- 2.5 mm, the terminal appendage oflf-stk likewise laminulate and ±5-6.5 x 1.5-2 mm; pinnae 2- 4-jug., strongly accrescent distally, the proximal pair ± 1 cm and the distal pair 3-4 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.5 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 17-24-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair less than 1 mm distant from minute paraphyUidia, the blades narrowly oblong obtuse from bluntly auriculate base, those at mid-rachis ±5.5-7 x 1.4-1.8 mm and ±4 times as long as wide, all 6-8-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib 2-3-branched on each side from below middle, the inner posterior and inner anterior nerves produced nearly to blade apex, the rest progressively shorter, the venation immersed above, pallid and prominulous beneath, the marginal cilia to 0.8-1.5 mm.
Peduncles 1.5-2 cm; capitula without filaments 12-15 X 6.5-7.5 mm, prior to anthesis conelike, the bracts wholly concealing the fl-buds; bracts resembling stipules in texture and striate venation, elliptic-obovate ± 3 x 2 mm, the margin erose and setose-ciliate; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.5-0.6 mm, extemally glabrous, the undulately 4-lobed rim weakly ciliolate; corolla narrowly turbinate ±3 mm, the triangular lobes ±0.9 x 0.9 mm, thinly setose dorsally, the slender midrib faintly branched; filaments pink, monadelphous through ± 1 mm, exserted 8 mm.
Pods numerous per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblanceolate 13-15 X 6 mm, mostly 3-seeded, the nearly straight replum 0.5-0.6 mm wide, the papery reddish-brown valves elevated over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely hispid-comose overall with slender smooth lustrous, incurved-ascending setae to 4-6.5 mm, the replum at maturity splitting at apex and the valves breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 3-3.5 mm long; seeds obliquely descending, compressed-obovoid ±3 x 2.2 mm, the testa lustrous black.
In unknown habitat, but to be expected in open places near or below 200 m, known only from the type-locality in the valley of rio Cuiaba near 15°S, 56°30'W in s.-centr. Mato Grosso, BrazU. — H. ± XII-II. Although known as yet from only one collection, M. cisparanensis appears specifically distinct from the obviously related M. neptunioides in stiffly erect, not trailing stems, weak scattered prickles, reduction of the tme petioles to the leafpulvinus (the first pair of pinnae consequently arising as it were directly next the stem), and particularly in the broad pod comosely hispid with much longer setae.
In pod and armament it resembles distantly allopatric M. occidentalis, but this differs fundamentally in number of pinna-pairs.
290.
Mimosa occidentalis Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 162.
1928.-Typus infra sub var. occidentali indicatur.
Erect or diffuse, suffrutescent but sometimes precociously flowering, microphyUidious herbs 5-15 dm, randomly armed on some intemodes and some lf-axes with erect straight or gently recurved, stramineous or sordid setaculei to 1.5- 4 mm, variably hirsute or pubemlent, sometimes glandular-setulose (as described under vars.), the foUage ± bicolored, the lfts glabrous and essentially veinless ventrally, pallid-nerved and either glabrous or pubemlent dorsally, the ellipsoid capitula single and geminate in the axil of coeval lvs, sometimes pseudoracemose in praefloration but lateral in fruit.
Stipules either loosely ascending or reflexed, ovate-acuminate, lanceolate or lance-triangular 3-11 x (1-) 1.3-4.5 mm, the herbaceous, green or reddish-brown blades becoming papery, striately 12-33-nerved, either hirsute or glabrous dorsally, ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of mature cauline lvs 3.5-12.5 cm, the petiole 2-29 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-23 mm, the ventral groove intermpted between pinna-pairs and there (nearly always) with a green or reddish, linear-lanceolate spicule 0.7-2.7 mm; pinnae of larger lvs 4-9-jug., of some diminished distal ones shorter (no further described), accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 2-6 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (0.4-)0.6-2.7 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 22-36- jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the blades linear from semicordate base, abmptly apiculate, those near mid-rachis 4-9 x 0.6-1.7 mm, (4.3-)4.6-7(-7.2) times as long as wide, all 3- 5(-6)-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib 2-3-branched on each side near and above middle, the one anterior and the innermost posterior nerves produced well above mid-blade, the outer posterior ones short and weak.
Peduncles (1-) 1.5-7 cm; capitula without filaments 8- 14(-17) X 6.5-9 mm, prior to anthesis conelike, the obtuse fl-buds either concealed or surpassed (equalled) by the striate-nerved bracts, these lanceor ovate-elliptic and (2.5-)3-5 x 0.9-1.4 mm, persistent; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx shallowly campanulate or turbinate, either hyaline or brown, the subtmncate or irregularly short-denticulate rim ciliolate with fine setulae to 0.2-0.8 mm; corolla either turbinate-campanulate or narrowly vase-shaped, constricted at base, 2.4-3.5 mm, the ovate lobes 0.6-1.5 X 0.6-0.9 mm, essentially 1-nerved but the nerve sometimes faintly tenuously branched; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.3-0.7 mm below the ovary, exserted 5.5-10(-l 1) mm.
Po^described under var. occidentalis, that of var. novo-galiciana not seen.
Mimosa occidentalis is closely related to South American M. neptunioides, but seems specifically distinguishable by more numerous pinnae and leaflets, generally plumper capitula, and wider pod consisting of two to three, not three to six articles.
Its common and typical form is hirsute on stems, leaf-axes, and floral bracts with fine spreading setae and either totally eglandular or only microscopically viscidulous under the capitula.
A local form, found so far only at the far western end of the species-range, differs in simply pubemlent stems and leaf-axes and in the more or less gland-setulose capitula.
The fmit of this form being unknown, its status is somewhat doubtful and subject to evaluation.
Key to varieties of M. occidentalis 1.
Stems, lf-axes, and either margin or back (or both) offloralbracts hirsute with fine tapering setae to 1.5-5 mm, at base 0.1-0.2 mm, diam., both floral bracts and corolla-lobes eglandular; range of the species, from Nayarit to Veracruz, Chiapas, and Belize 290a. var. occidentalis (p. 477).
1.
Stems, lf-axes puberulent but lacking tapering setae, and floral bracts and corolla-lobes with at least some gland-tipped setulae; local in s. Nayarit and far w. Jalisco, Mexico 290b. var. novo-galiciana (p. 478).
290a. Mimosa occidentalis Britton & Rose var. occidentalis.
M. occidentalis Britton & Rose, 1928, I.e., sens, str.—"Type from near Acaponeta, Tepic [=Nayarit, Mexico], July, 1897, /.
N. Rose 5295."-Holotypus, US!; clastotypus, NY! Indumentum as given in key to varieties.
Pods usually several per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong, obtuse or minutely apiculate, 9-15 x 4.5- 5 mm, (1-)2-3-seeded, the straight replum 0.45- 0.6 mm wide, at maturity splitting apart at apex, the valves low-convex over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely hirsute with loose, forwardly curved, stramineous or bronzed, tapering setae resembling those of stem in length and diam., the papery valves breaking up when ripe into individually dehiscent articles ±3.5-5 mm long; seeds lenticular, in broad profile ±2.5- 3 x 3 mm, the testa dark brown, highly lustrous.
On grassy hillsides and in openings of bmshwoodland of coastal plain and foothills below 1000 m, scattered along the Pacific slope of Mexico from Nayarit to Chiapas, thence weakly e. into s. Veracruz and Belize; to be expected in Guatemala.-Fl. (VI-)VII-I(-IV), probably whenever moisture permits.
Map 44.
290b. Mimosa occidentalis Britton & Rose var. noYO-galiciana Bameby, var. nov., a var. occidentali pube caulina hirsuta deficienti et bracteis floralibus cum coroUae lobulis ± glanduloso-setulosis diversa, legumine adhuc ignoto forsan ulterius abstans.—Mexico.
Jalisco: Mun.
La Huerta, bosque abierto de Quercus aristata, 700 m, Cerro Huehuent6n, 20-25 km al E de Chamela, 27.
VIII.1976 (fl), /.
Rzedowski & R. McVaugh 7i7(?.—Holotypus, MICH = NY Neg. 12365.
M. orthocarpa sensu McVaugh, R. novo-galic, 5: 216.
1987, ex parte, quoad specimina jaliscensia et nayaritensia, caeteris exclusis; non M. orthocarpa Bentham.
Indumentum as given in key to varieties.
Pods unknown.
In open oak woodland and disturbed thickets in pastureland, 700-1000 m, known only from s.-w. Nayarit (near Tepic) and s.-w. Jalisco (typestation).-H. VIII-IX(-?).
Map 44.
McVaugh's note (1987, sub M. orthocarpa) clearly brought out the differences between the specimens cited above and genuine M. orthocarpa, which has one-nerved stipules, moriform capitula, and armature of stout vulnerant aculei (as opposed to weak setaculei).
If correctly subordinated to M. occidentalis, they should prove to have a short, 2-3 seeded, sessile craspedium, unlike the narrow, actually or potentially 4-8- seeded, stipitate fruit of M. orthocarpa.
It is curious to note that var. occidentalis, var. novogaliciana and M. somnians have all been collected within a few kilometers of the city of Tepic, which raises the possibility that var. novogaliciana is a recent hybrid combining the glandular indumentum of M. somnians with the striately nerved stipules and one-nerved coroUalobes of M. occidentalis.
The leaves and leaflet venation of the three taxa are scarcely distinguishable.
Two ovary-dissections from the typenumber of var. novo-galiciana yielded four ovules apiece, foretelling a small occidentalis-like pod.
291.
Mimosa camporum Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 2: 130.
1840.-"British Guiana, Schomburgk, n. 725."—Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1890; isotypi, BM! F! = F Negs.
54819-21, M! MG! NY! US! W! M. flavescens Splitgerber, Tijdschr, Natuurl.
Gesch.
Physiol.
9(2): 110.
1842.-"[Surinam] CrescU in padulosis [sic] prope Joode Savanne."
—Isotypi, Splitgerber s.n.,
BM! W!—Equated with the preceding by Bentham, 1875: 436.
M. aeschynomenes Bentham, Bot. voy.
Sulphur 89.
1844.—"[Nicaragua] Realejo."
—Holotypus, Barclay & Hinds s.n.,
K!; isotypus, BM!—Equated with M. camporum by Bentham, 1875: 436, and with M. flavescens by Britton & Rose, 1928: 162.
M. pusilla Bentham, Bot. voy.
Sulphur 90.1844. "
[Nicaragua] Realejo."
Holotypus, Barclay & Hinds s.n.,
K!; isotypus, BM!—Equated with M. camporum by Grether, 1987:311, who cited the BM plant as holotypus.
M. flaviseta Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 90.
1846.— "Surinam, Hostmann, n. 813."—Holotypus, Hostmann & Kappler 813, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1892 (plant at left); isotypus, NY!; presumed isotypi, Hostmann s.n.,
BM! M!—Equated with M. camporum by Grether, 1987: 311, who indicated the BM duplicate as holotypus.
M. martensis Britton & Killip, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 35: 152.
1936.—"Near Masinga, Santa Marta, Magdalena, Colombia, Nov. 17, IS9S, H. H. Smith 714."-Holotypus, NY! = NY Neg. 4987 (plant at top); isotypi, L! UC!—Equated with M. camporum by Grether, 1987: 311.
M. camporum sensu Bentham, 1876: 378; Kleinhoonte, 1940: 283.
M.flavescenssensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 162; Britton & Killip, 1936: 153.
M. aeschynomenes sensu Bentham, 1846: 90 (^'aeschynomenis").
M. pusilla sensu Bentham, 1846: 91; B. L. Robinson, 1898: 330; Britton & Rose, 1928: 162.
Monocarpic herbs commonly (2-)3-12(-15) dm at maturity, sometimes enduring a full year or more and then basally lignescent, sometimes ephemeral and fmiting when only 2-10 cm tall, the usually stiffly erect, sometimes diffiise-assurgent stem either simple virgate or branched from near ground or distally, together with lf-axes and peduncles at once pubemlent with short incurved hairs and hispid with erect yellowish, finely tapering, when long flagelliform setae of variable length and caliber, the longest 1-4.5(-6) mm and some commonly, but not invariably dilated basaUy to become setaculei, the foliage subconcolorous, the plane olivaceous lfts subvertically imbricate in sleep, usually glabrous on both faces, rarely puberulent dorsally above mid-blade, all distantly setose-ciliate (sometimes only along proximal margin), the small ovoid or subglobose capitula shortly pedunculate in If-axils, immersed in foliage.
Stipules erect, often reddishbrown, broadly lanceolate or ovate-acuminate, usually 3-9 x l-2.3(-2.8) mm, striately 12-25 nerved from base, in uncommon depauperate phases only 1.5-3 x 0.5-1 mm and 7-15 nerved, the blades usually hirsute and puberulent dorsally, rarely glabrate, always ciliate, glabrous within, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of larger lvs commonly 1.5-7(-8.5) cm, with petiole including livid pulvinus (2-)3-12 x 0.4-1 mm (in diminutive ecotypes only x 0.1-0.35 mm), the ventral groove intermpted between pinna-pairs and there charged with an acicular or linear-attenuate spicule 0.3-2.4 mm (obsolete at some bridges and in some depauperate lvs); pinnae of longer lvs 2- 6-, in robust plants to 9- and in depauperate ones only 1- or 1-2-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 3-7 (in depauperates 0.5-3) cm, the interpinnal segments (0.4-)0.6-1.5(-1.7) mm; lfts of distal (or only) pair of pinnae (16-) 18-38-, in depauperates 5-12-jug., decrescent at ends of rachis but otherwise equilong, the blades linear or Unear-oblong from obtusangulate base, obtuse or apiculate, the longer ones (3.7-)4- lO(-ll) X (0.7-)0.8-2(-2.2) mm, (4.1-)4.2- 5.5(-6) times as long as wide, all smooth veinless above, beneath (4-)5-6-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib pinnately (1-)2-3-branched distally, the inner posterior and anterior nerve alike expiring beyond mid-blade, the outer posterior ones progressively shorter, the venation slenderly prominulous, usually pallid or whitish.
Peduncles commonly solitary, less often paired or paired with a branchlet, (1-)2-17(-22) mm; capitula without filaments (2-)3-7 x (2-)2.5-7 mm, prior to anthesis conelike and ± hispid; bracts lance-elliptic (1-)1.7-4.5 x (0.4-)0.6-l mm, resembling stipules in texture and striate venation, either setose or glabrous dorsally, setose-ciliate, usually concealing the associated fl, persistent;^ow^r5 4-merous 8-androus, all or almost all bisexual; calyx membranous glabrous 0.15-0.3 mm, the truncate or undulate rim usually glabrous, rarely with 2-3 minute setulae not more than 0.2 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 1.4-2.3 mm, the almost plane membranous, faintly 1-nerved lobes 0.5-0.7 x 0.4-0.65 mm, usually thinly setulose dorsally, sometimes glabrous; filaments lilac-pink fading whitish, expanded in morning hours, free to base, exserted (2-)2.5-4.2 mm.
Pods ascending in dense but not hard clusters, sessile, in profile oblong or when short elliptic, (5-)7-15 x 3-4 mm, (1-)2-3(-4)- seeded, the slightly constricted replum 0.3-0.6 mm wide, muticous at apex, the papery valves coUiculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike both pubemlent and hispid with ascending tapering lustrous setae to 1-3 mm, the ripe replum breaking apart at apex to release the freefaUing, individuaUy dehiscent articles 3-5(-6) mm long; seeds plumply obovoid 2.4-3 x 1.7-2.4 mm, the testa castaneous lustrous.
Colonially weedy in forest clearings, in neglected gardens, on roadsides, and in disturbed brush-savanna, encountered most often in ruderal conditions and the aboriginal dispersal unknowable, locally abundant from sea-level to 450 (in Chiapas to 1000 and in Andean Colombia to 2000) m, widely scattered through Brazilian Amazonia, the Orinoco valley in Venezuela, the Guianas, and Andean and n. Colombia, extending e. in Brazil to Maranhao, s. just into Bolivia, n. into the Lesser Antilles (Grenada, St. Lucia, Martinique), and discontinuously (perhaps overlooked) through Central America into s. Mexico (on Pacific slope to Guerrero, on the Caribbean slope to s. Veracruz).—Fl. indefinitely through the year, adult and seedling plants sometimes contemporary.
Map 44.
Mimosa camporum forms, with Mexican and Honduran M. occidentalis B. & R. and Bolivian M. neptunioides Harms, a small group of octandrous species that resemble M. somnians in striate stipules and floral bracts and in form and venation of leaflets, but differ in faintly 1 -nerved, not striately several-nerved corolla-lobes.
In its immediate group it is distinguished by monocarpic duration, extremely small capitula bome on abbreviated peduncle, and shortly exserted filaments.
The flowers are ephemeral, their filaments being fully expanded only during morning hours, and the capitula are usuaUy highly fruitful, most or all ovaries maturing at least one seed, commonly 2-3 and at times 4 seeds.
The flowers appear to be autogamous, which would account for perpetuation within sympatric populations of small differences in indumentum, branching, and leaf-formula.
The rich synonymy of M. camporum testifies to variation in stature, setose pubescence, leafformula and diameter of capitulum observed among early collections ofthe species, a variation which Bentham eventually perceived as taxonomically insignificant.
The type of M. camporum is of medium height, relatively short-hispid with none but slender setae, and has capitula about 4 mm in diameter.
Those of M. flavescens and M. flaviseta are more robust plants densely hispid with setae partly dilated into setaculei that may lose their flagelliform tip in age and then resemble genuine prickles.
The types ofM. pusilla and M. martensis represent not infrequent populations of depauperate, rapidly maturing individuals in which only (or mostly) juvenile foliage, with sometimes much reduced leaf-formula, is produced.
These short-lived, sometimes ephemeral populations occur sporadically through much of the range of M. camporum (Guerrero, Mexico to Martinique in the Antilles and Rondonia in Brazil) and vary like their most robust counterparts in pubescence and size of pod.
The contrast between almost sympatric populations can be very remarkable.
On Martinique, for example, Duss collected in 1880 a robust setaculeate plant (Duss 1148, NY) with leafformula attaining vi/34 which well matches so-called M.flavescens; on the same island Sastre (7424, 7552, both NY, P) has lately encountered a diminutive, thinly setulose form with leaf-formula about i-ii/5-13, sometimes fmiting when only 2-5 cm tall.
In the context of the insular flora these suggest two distinct species.
The taller plant, which Duss (Fl. phan.
Antill. fran?.
245.
1897) thought to have been introduced with fertUizer, closely matches examples from the island ofGrenada and from continental South and Central America.
The diminutive ones discovered by Sastre, which may be native but formerly overlooked, are nearly matched by collections from Guarico, Venezuela (Pittier 12505, NY; Davidse 4265, ISTY) and are similar to the typus of M. pusilla from Nicaragua.
A collection from Acapulco, Guerrero (Palmer 9, GH, ISTY, referred by Robinson, 1898, to M. pusilla) combines in one plant a relatively robust diffuse growth-habit, distantly setaculeate cauline pubescence, a low leaf-formula of i-iii/10-13 and tiny few-flowered capitula.
Only controlled cultures will demonstrate whether these depauperate, seemingly juvenile forms of M. camporum, that are diverse in some details of stmcture and scattered through the range of the species, are genetically or only edaphically controlled.
Until this question is answered the taxonomic status of M. pusilla and the very similar but not identical M. martensis will remain controversial.
D(vi).
Series RONDONIANAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Habbasia ser. Rondonianae Barneby, ser. nov. monotypica, in genere suo foliorum pinnis stipella vera stipuliformi subtentis unica, ulterius in sect. Habbasia capitiUis ellipsoideis strobiliformibus filamentisque alte connatis notabilis, affinitate proxima leguminis defectu inscmtabili.—Sp. typica (sola): M. rondoniana Hoehne.
Unarmed microphyllidious shrubs.
Indumentum offineflagelliformsetae, eglandular.
Stipules dilated, striately venulose.
Leaf-formula ii-iv/ 27-35; If-rachis charged behind each pinna-pulvinus with a striately venulose stipel (resembling a stipule in texture but smaller) and between each pinna-pair with a dilated spicule of like form; larger lfts 6-10 mm; primary veins of lfts 6-8 subparallel.
Inflorescence of few, solitary, densely strobiUform capitula ± 3 times as long as diam., shortly exserted from foliage, the 4-merous diplostemonous corollas concealed by imbricate bracts; calyx shallowly campanulate, minutely ciliolate; corolla ±2.5 mm, the lobes faintly 1 -nerved; filaments pink, monadelphous around ovary.
Fruit unknown.
Sp.
1, of upland campo in centr. Rondonia, Brazil.
Mimosa rondoniana is the only known species of the genus in which each pinna is subtended by a genuine stipel inserted on the leaf-rachis behind and below its pulvinus; and is further peculiar for dense conelike capitula, of which the obovate, closely imbricate bracts wholly conceal the corolla.
Its striately venose stipules are compatible with ser. Habbasia, ser. Neptunioideae and ser. Pachycarpae, and the venation of the leaflets especially suggests the first of these.
The species certainly falls within this circle of affinity, but until the pod is known its immediate kinship must remain speculative.
292.
Mimosa rondoniana Hoehne, Com. lin. telegr., Bot. 12: 6, t. 180.
1922.-"No.
2022, Kuhlmann, Cataqui-Iamain (Campos dos Umpas), Rondonia [=Cataqueama, ± 11°10'S, 63°10'W], noroeste de Matto-Grosso, em Dezembro de 1918."—Holotypus, SP (?,
not seen); isotypus, RB! = NY Neg. 722^6.
Stiffly many-branched microphyllidious shrub 1-1.5 m, except for inner face of stipules and upper face of lfts densely silky-pilose throughout with extremely fine sublustrous flagelliform setae at most 0.1 mm diam. at base and to 2-4 mm long, the densely imbricate lfts brownish-olivaceous, a little paler and beyond middle pilosulous dorsally, the dense ellipsoid conelike capitula shortly pedunculate and mostly solitary at 1-3 distal nodes of each branchlet subtended by a bract or a greatly diminished If.
Stipules erect papery castaneous, broadly triangular acute or subacuminate 6-12 x 2.5-5 mm, finely striatevenulose, silky dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks stout 2-3.5 cm, the petiole ±5-10 x 1.5-2 mm, the rachis charged immediately behind each pinna with a papery striate stipel ± 2-3 x 1.5-2 mm and ventrally, between each pinna-pair, with a similar but somewhat larger spicular blade resembling a stipule in texture and venulation, the terminal appendage triangular-lanceolate, exserted beyond last pair of lfts; pinnae 2-4-, of most lvs exactly 3-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair 4-7 cm in major cauline lvs but shorter toward the inflorescence, the interfoUolar segments ±1-1.6 mm; lfts of longer pinnae ±27-35-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair next to pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades Unear-oblong obtuse from deeply bluntly auriculate base, those near midrachis 6-10 X 1.2-2.2 mm, all 6-8-nerved from livid pulvinule, the subcentric midrib weakly 1- 3-branched well above middle, the inner posterior and inner anterior nerves alike brochidodrome well above mid-blade, and the pair exterior to these produced nearly to mid-blade, the margin finely setose-ciliolate.
Peduncles mostly solitary, stout 6-16 mm; capitula without filaments ± 6 mm diam. and ± 3 times as long; bracts densely imbricate, obovate obtuse, the larger ones 2.5-3.5 X 1.5-2 mm, all papery, finely striatenerved, shallowly concave ventrally, persistent through anthesis and concealing the corolla, finely silky-strigulose dorsally, glabrous within, setose-ciliolate;y/ow^r5 4-merous 8-androus, at least some lower ones staminate; calyx submembranous, shallowly campanulate ±0.4 x 0.5 mm, obscurely lobulate, glabrous extemally, minutely cUiolate; coroUa turbinate, basaUy attenuate, 2.2- 2.5 mm, the broadly ovate obtuse, shallowly concave lobes 0.8 X 0.9 mm, thinly pilosulous extemally; filaments pink, monadelphous through ±1.5 mm, exserted 4-5 mm; pod unknown.
In campo near 600 m, known only from the type-locality at the e. end of Sa. dos Pacaas Novos in centr. Rondonia, Brazil.-Fl.
XII-I. D(vii).
Series ROJASIANAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Habbasia ser. Rojasianae Bameby, ser. nov., ut videtur ser. Neptunioideis proximae et cum iis stipulis striatim 5-17-nerviis congruae, sed foliorum rachi espiculata necnon foliolomm venatione diversae.—Sp. typica: M. rojasii Hassler.
Unarmed microphyllidious subshrubs.
Indumentum of short villi and either plain smooth setae, or gland-tipped setulae, or both.
Stipules striately 7-15-nerved.
Leaf-formula v-ix/11-30; sulcus of If-rachis bridged between pinna-pairs but espiculate; longer lfts 4-9 mm; midrib of lfts branched beyond mid-blade, the secondary venules departing at wide angles and brochidodrome within the margin.
Flowers capitulate or spicate, the capitula without filaments 4.5-9 mm diam., the bracts striate like stipules; calyx 0.2- 0.9 mm; corolla 2.2-4 mm, the lobes 1-3-nerved; filaments pink, monadelphous 0.2-1 mm.
Pods either sessile or stipitate, 4.5-8 mm wide, 3-12- seeded, the replum 0.5-1 mm wide, the valves disjointing into individually dehiscent articles.
Spp. 3, of campo habitats in s.-e. Bolivia and Paraguay.
This group ofthree species, none ofwhich were known to Bentham, resembles ser. Neptunioideae and ser. Habbasia in striately venulose stipules, but has espiculate leaf-stalks and a characteristic pattem of leaflet-venulation: the secondary venules beyond mid-blade departing from the costa at wide angles and recurving to anastomose within the leaflet-margin.
The plants resemble some Pachycarpae in habit and foliage, but differ in the fruit, a commonplace craspedium with replum at most 1 mm diameter.
Mimosa josephina is peculiar in lacking the plain setae prevalent in sect. Habbasia, and its long narrow pod coinciding with 3-nerved corolla-lobes suggests affinity to ser. Bipinnatae.
Mimosa chacoensis, differing from the other two in spicate flowers, lack of gland-tipped setulae, fewer leaflets, and filaments only very shortly monadelphous below the ovary, is relatively isolated even in the series.
Conspectus of ser. Rojasianae Mimosa * Fls capitate; inflorescence both glandular and setose;filamentsconnate through ± 1 mm; corolla-lobes 1 -nerved; pod 3-5-seeded.
293. rojasii Hassler ** Like *, but plain setae lacking; corolla-lobes 3-nerved; pod 9-12-seeded.
294. josephina Bameby *** Fls spicate; plant eglandular; filaments nearly free; pod 4-7-seeded.
295. chacoensis Bameby & Fortunato Key to species of ser. Rojasianae 1.
Fls capitellate, the capitula ovoid or subglobose, the axis becoming 4-15 mm; glandular setulae present throughout or at least in inflorescence and on pod; lfts of longer pinnae (13-)15-30-jug.; filaments monadelphous through ± 1 mm.
2.
Plant puberulent, setose, and (at least on pod) viscid-setulose; calyx 0.35-0.5 mm and corolla 2.7- 3.3 mm, its lobes 1-nerved; pod 2.5-3.5 cm long, 3-5-seeded, densely hispid-setose; e.-centr. Paraguay 293.
M. rojasii (p. 482).
2.
Plant viscid-villosulous or -pubemlent throughout but esetose; calyx 0.7-0.9 mm and corolla ±4 mm, its lobes 3-nerved; pod 6.5-9 cm long, 9-12-seeded, viscid-pubemlent; s.-e. Bolivia 294.
M. josephina (p. 483).
1.
Fls spicate, the axis becoming (1.5-)3-7 cm; no gland-tipped setulae; lfts of longer pinnae 11-14-jug.; filaments monadelphous only at very base; w. Paraguay 295.
M. chacoensis (p. 484).
293.
Mimosa rojasii Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9.
1910.—"Paraguay: .
.
.
Ponta Pora, fl. mens. Dec; Hassler no. 9799, leg. Rojas; ibid. fmct. mens. Jan.; Hassler no. 9799, a, leg. Rojas."
—Lectotypus, Hassler 9799 (fl), G! = F. Neg. 28228; isotypi, K! NY! P! W!; syntypi, Hassler 9799a (fr), BM! G! GH! P! W! Unarmed, amply microphyllidious subshrubs from xylopodium, the erect or incurved-ascending, simple or few-branched stems ±3-9 dm, hispidulous with weak plain setae to 1-1.4 mm and not over 0.2 mm diam. at dilated base mixed with minute pubemlence and distally, at least on pods, with many or random gland-tipped setulae, the plane thick-textured, glabrous or at times residually glandular-ciliolate or remotely setoseciliate lfts either subconcolorous or bicolored, when dry olivaceous or dark purplish-brown and smooth above, beneath paler brown and coarsely venulose, the oblong-ellipsoid or subglobose capitula mostly axillary to and shorter than coeval distal lvs, some however pseudoracemose in early anthesis but then subtended by a hysteranthous If, the fmits immersed in foliage.
Stipules firm erect 3-6 x 1.2-2 mm, glabrous facially, setose-cUiate, from base striately 7-15-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 5-9.5(-12) cm, the petiole including obese livid pulvinus (5-)7-16 (of some lower lvs to 30) mm, at middle 0.65-1.2 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 7-20 mm, the narrow ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae of all but random early lvs 6-12(-15)-jug., decrescent proximally and sometimes also distally, the rachis of longer ones (2.5-)3.5-5(-9) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.8-3.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (13-)15-24(-30)-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.4-0.9 mm distant from elliptic or ovate-elliptic paraphyllidia mostly ±0.5-1 X 0.2-0.3 mm, rarely larger and not distinguishable from lfts proper, the blades oblong obtuse, the larger ones (3-)4-8.5 x 1-2.5 mm, all dorsally 3-5-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib giving rise on each side to 2-5 ascending secondary venules, the venation becoming pallid and bluntly prominulous.
Peduncles 1.5-5(-6) cm; capitula without filaments 5- 8 mm diam., the axis becoming (4-)5-15 mm; bracts elliptic obtuse (1.5-)2.3-3 x (0.7-)l-1.2 mm, striate like stipules; fl-buds obovoid setulose; ^ow^r^ 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx (0.35-)0.4-0.5 mm, glabrous externaUy, the obscurely lobulate rim either naked or remotely ciliolate with either plain or glandtipped setulae; coroUa (2.7-)2.9-3.3 mm, the ascending ovate 1-nerved lobes 1.1-1.6 x 0.8-1.1 mm, scarcely thickened at apex, thinly setulose extemally; filaments pink, united through nearly 1 mm around base of pilosulous ovary, exserted 5-7 mm.
Pods ±4-11 per capitulum sessile, Unear-oblong almost straight, ±25-36 X 6-8 mm, 3-5-seeded, the straight or shallowly constricted replum 0.6-1 mm wide, together with valves hispid overall with erect but tapering-incurved, basally dilated yellowish setae to 3-6 mm long and 0.25-0.6 mm diam. at dilated base, intermixed with shorter gland-tipped setulae, the vesture not fully concealing the livid valves, these becoming firmly papery and when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles ± 5 - 6 mm long. In campo at (300-)400-800 m, known only from the Paraguayan slope of Sa. de Amambay and about the slopes ofCerro Cora, on and around 22°30'S in depto Pedro Juan Caballero, Paraguay.—Fl.
X-II; fr.
Xll-onward.
Now known from nine collections, most of them quite recent and all from the sources of rio Aquidaban in east-central Paraguay, M. rojasii tums out to be unexpectedly variable in detail.
The type-collections have ellipsoid capitula and essentially glabrous leaflets, but subglobose capitula now appear to be commoner, and the setose element of the indumentum may be much accentuated, the leaflets becoming either glandular-fimbriolate or sparsely setose-ciliolate.
In gross appearance the more setose state of M. rojasii recalls Mexican M. occidentalis, but it differs in strong woody root associated with campo habitat, and lacks interpinnal spicules on the leaf-stalk.
Its close near relatives are both endemic to the upper Paraguay basin: M. chacoensis different in spiciform capitula, and M. josephina distinguished (inter alia) by three-nerved corolla-lobes and much longer 9-12-seeded pod.
294.
Mimosajosephina Bameby, sp. nov., stipulis bracteolisque interfloralibus striato-nervulosis aliisque multis indiciis M. rojasii affinis, ab ilia caulibus ubique dense pilis simplicibus setulisque capitato-glandulosis viscido-villosulis (nec setis 1 mm et longioribus hispidis) indutis, coroUae 4 (nec 2.8-3.3) mm longae lobis 3 (nec l)-nervus, necnon leguminis longioris 6.5-9 (nec 2.5-3) cm longi 9-12 (nec 3- 5)-spermi valvulis minutim viscido-pubemlis (nec hispido-setosis) manifeste diversa.—Bolivia.
Sta. Cmz: dry sandy soil near S. Jose, Chiquitos, 300 m, 11.1950 (fl + fr mat), M. Cardenas 45i6.-Holotypus, US 1989948 = NYNeg.
11990.
Erect unarmed subshrub ± 1 m with stiff virgate, equably leafy stem branched distally into a thyrsiform, proximally leafy panicle of plumply ellipsoid capitula, viscid-puberulent almost throughout with short white hairs and glandtipped setulae to 0.1-0.3 mm, esetose, only the faces of some of the plane thick-textured, dorsally venulose lfts glabrous or almost so.
Stipules firm erect triangular or lanceolate 3-7 x 1.3-3 mm, striately 8-15-nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks 4-10.5 mm, the petiole including hard pulvinus ±9-20 X 0.8-1.6 mm, the interpinnal segments to 8-13 mm, the open shallow ventral groove bridged between pinna-pairs but spicules 0; pinnae 5-8-jug., decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones 2-7 cm, the interfoliolar segments to 1-2.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 22-30-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair 1-1.7 mm distant from oblanceolate paraphyllidia 0.6-1 mm, the blades oblong from obtusangulate base, obtusely deltate at apex, those near mid-rachis 5-9 x 1.5-2.8 mm, 3-3.5 times as long as wide, all nearly veinless above, beneath coarsely prominulously 4-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric beyond mid-blade and pinnately 5-7-branched on each side, the anterior and inner posterior nerves narrowly intramarginal, produced almost to blade apex and anastomosing with the secondary branches of midrib, the outer posterior nerve very short.
Peduncles 2-3-nate, 3-4 cm; capitula without filaments 10-12 X 8-9 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the narrowly clavate receptacle 7-9 mm; bracts oblanceolate or obovate 1.4-2 x 0.6-1 mm, subglumaceous 9-13-nerved, nidulating the obovoid obtuse stipitate-glandular fl-buds, deciduous at anthesis;y/ow^r^ 4-merous 8-androus, most (perhaps all) bisexual; calyx sessile campanulate 0.7-0.9 mm, glabrous extemally, the subtmncate rim minutely gland-fimbriolate; corolla turbinate-vase-shaped 4 mm, the ovate 3-nerved lobes ±1.5 x 1.3 mm, the lobe-tips thinly pubemlent and stipitate-glandular; filaments lilac-pink, monadelphous ± 1 mm around stipe and base of ovary, exserted 8-9.5 mm; ovary viscid-puberulent.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, in 484 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 profile undulately linear straight 65-90 x 6-7 mm, 9-12-seeded, at base attenuate into a stipe 2-4.5 mm, shortly cuspidulate at apex, the shallowly constricted replum 0.6-1 mm wide, the papery valves low-bullate over each seed, the replum and valves alike thinly minutely viscidpubemlent overall, when ripe breaking into freefalling, individually dehiscent elliptic articles 6- 8 mm long; seeds lentiform 3.8-4.3 x ±3.3 mm, the testa dark brown, smooth, highly glossy.
In dry sandy ground near 300 m, known only from the type-locality near S. Jose de Chiquitos, at 17°50'S, 60°45'W in Sta. Cmz, Bolivia.-H. (?-)XII-I. Mimosa josephina has many features in common with Paraguayan M. rojasii: striately nerved stipules and floral bracts; partly glandular indumentum; leaflets coarsely venulose dorsally in a characteristic design; and plumply ellipsoid capitula.
The pair seem surely allied, but differ significantly in stature and pubescence, in venation of corolla-lobes, and in length of pod correlated with ovuleand seed-number.
These differences, set out in the key to ser. Rojasianae and in the foregoing diagnosis of M. josephinae, are strengthened by a gap of some 700 km between their known ranges, to the east and west of the Paraguai valley respectively.
The less closely related but almost or actually sympatric M. neptunioides differs from M. josephina in diffuse hispid-hirsute but eglandular stems, stipules at once larger and more elaborately striate-venulose, few (2-4, not 5-8) pairs of pinnae in larger leaves, and enlarged floral bracts that conceal the flowerbuds prior to anthesis.
295.
Mimosa chacoensis Bameby & Fortunato, Brittonia 39: 169, fig. 3.
1987.-"Paraguay.
Presidente Hayes: Fortin E. Ayala (Nanawa), Jan 1981 (fere deflorat.,
fr. matur.), PastorArenas s.n. in BACP 2i<96."—Holotypus, seen by Fortunato, BACP!; isotypi, CTES, NY! Unarmed, amply microphyllidious, functionally herbaceous subshrub with erratically fewbranched terete humifiise stems 6 dm or more long, finely villosulous and weakly hispid with short erect pallid hairs to ±0.2 mm and weak subhorizontal tapering setae 0.5-2 mm, the brown-olivaceous concolorous lfts glabrate ventraUy, villosulous beneath, distantly setose-ciliate immarginate, the dense oblong-cylindric flspikes solitary long-pedunculate in upper If-axils, humistrate in fmit.
Stipules spreading and in age deflexed, broadly ovate-triangular obtuse 1.5-3.5 X 1.2-3 mm, the papery castaneous blades striately 9-11-nerved, dorsally pubemlent, persistent.
Leaf-stalks laterally compressed 5-8 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 6-11 mm, at middle 0.6-1 mm diam., the longer interpinnal segments 6-10 mm, the narrow ventral sulcus bridged between pinnae but spicules 0; pinnae 7-9-jug., subequilong, the rachis 1.5-2 cm; lfts ll-14-jug., the first pair 1-2 mm distant from elliptic paraphyllidia 0.4-0.7 mm, the blades narrowly oblong obtuse from shallowly semicordate base, the larger ones 4-6 x 1.2-1.7 mm, 3.3-4.5 times as long as wide, all 4-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib l-2(-3)- branched on each side near and above mid-blade, the anterior and inner posterior nerves narrowly intramarginal, produced to blade apex, the outer posterior one very short, the venulation almost imperceptible on upper face, bluntly prominulous beneath.
Peduncles stout ascending 5-9 cm, ± as long as subtending lf-stk; spikes densely many-fld, without filaments ±4.5 mm diam., the axis (1.5-)3-7 cm; bracts resembling stipules in shape, texture and striate venation ± 1 mm, pubemlent dorsally, caducous; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, the proximal ones apparently all infertile; calyx papery-membranous, shallowly campanulate ±0.2 mm, glabrous extemally, the obscurely denticulate rim ciliolate with setulae 0.2-0.5 mm; corolla turbinate-campanulate 2.2- 2.4 mm, the 4-ribbed tube glabrous, the triangular-ovate, shallowly cucullate, scarcely thickened lobes ±0.9 X 0.8 mm, thinly hirsutulous dorsally; filaments pale pink, united below ovary through ±0.2 mm, exserted 5.5-6.5 mm; ovary hirsutulous.
Pods ±4-10 per spike, ascending from upper half of floral rachis, in profile undulately linear 20-42 x 4.5-6 mm, 4-7-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.5-0.7 mm wide, the papery brown valves coUiculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 5-7 mm long, the replum and valves alike villosulous overall and hispid with slender erect setae to ±1.5 mm; 5^^flf5 compressed-obovoid ±3.5-4 x 2.5-3 mm, the atrocastaneous testa smooth lustrous.
In cultivated grassland near 200 m, known only from the type-locality in Chaco Boreal of depto. Presidente Hayes, at 23°24'S, 59°45'W, w.-centr. Paraguay.-H. (1-)Xl-l.-Wepin.
Mimosa chacoensis resembles M. rojasii and M. neptunioides in striately nerved stipules, and the latter particularly in number of pinnae and venation of leaflets; but it is instantly distinguished from both by spicate, not capitate flowers.
It differs further from M. rojasii, endemic to campo habitats on and near Sa. de Amambay along the Paraguay-Brazil border, in humifuse stems, absence of glandular setulae, short pinnae bearing only 11-14, not 15-30 pairs of dorsally villosulous (not glabrous) leaflets, longer peduncles, and only very shortly monadelphous filaments; and further from M. neptunioides in much smaller 9-11-, not 30-50-nerved stipules, lack of interpinnal spicules, and about twice as many pinnae per leaf The distantly allopatric M. miranda, technically similar in spicate inflorescence, has aculeate stems, leaf-stalks armed with long interpinnal spicules, and different leaf-formula and leaflet-venation.
D(viii).
Series PSEUDOCYMOSAE Hassler Mimosa sect. Habbasia ser. Pseudocymosae Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 10.
1910.—Sp. unica: M. chodatii Hassler.
Diffuse unarmed macrophyllidious subshrubs.
Indumentum of minute villi and spreading smooth setae, the pod in addition viscid-setulose.
Stipules deffexed ovate, striately nerved.
Leaf-formula i-U/4-6, the larger lfts ±3-5 x 1.5- 2.5 cm, palmately nerved and reticulate.
Inflorescence ffexuously pseudoracemose and randomly branched; capitula subglobose; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx ±0.3 mm; corolla ±4.5 mm; filaments shortly monadelphous.
Pod stipitate, in profile oblong-eUiptic 8-9 mm wide, 2-3-seeded, the replum less than 1 mm diam., the valves disarticulating.
Sp.
1, of upland e.-centr. Paraguay.
Mimosa chodatii, remarkable in sect. Habbasia for its few large reticulately venose leaflets and incipiently branched, flexuous inflorescence, has no obvious close relative.
However its striately nerved stipules and floral bracts suggest kinship to the microphylUdious ser. Rojasianae native to the same region, with which it agrees further in indumentum, floral morphology and general aspect of the pod.
Hassler supposed it allied to ser. Leptopodae and Stipellares, but I find no particular species in either group persuasively similar in any significant syndrome of characters.
Hassler made much of the pseudocymose branching of the inflorescence, but this is inconstant even in the type-collection.
It appears that occasional peduncles are replaced by, or transformed into, a proliferous branchlet, but this occurs rarely elsewhere in the genus.
296.
Mimosa chodatii Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 12 + fig. 1910.-"Paraguay: In campis arenosis pr. Estrella, Sierra de Maracayu, flor. et fmct. mens. Jan. [1908]; Hassler no. 10087, leg. Rojas."
—Holotypus, G!; isotypi, BM! K! = NY Neg. 11823.
Functionally herbaceous subshrub, the flexuously decumbent stems 5-10 dm, together with Ifand inflorescence-axes hispid with smooth tapering yellowish setae to 4-6 mm, the firm ample venose lfts glabrous facially, sometimes microscopically ciliolate, a little paler beneath than above, the abmptly flexuous efoliate inflorescence exserted 1-1.5 dm beyond lvs.
Stipules deflexed, ovate obtuse or deltately subacute 7-12 X 4.5-8 mm, glabrous or almost so facially, setose-ciliate, striately several-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 1-3.8 cm, the petiole including livid pulvinus 5-13 x 1.3-2.5 mm, widely openly sulcate ventrally, the one interpinnal segment (lacking in some distal lvs) 14-25 mm; spicules 0; pinnae of most lvs 2-, of few upper lvs only 1-jug., the distal pair a little longer, the rachis 6.5-10 cm, the interfoliolar segments 13-32 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 4-6-jug., a little accrescent distally, the first pair 10-18 mm distant from lanceolate, striately nerved paraphylUdia 3-4 mm, the blades obliquely obovate from deeply semicordate base, at apex obtuse mucronulate, the larger ones 30- 48 X 14-27 mm, all prominently 5-7-nerved from pulvinule, the moderately displaced midrib slightly incurved distally, the inner posterior and anterior nerves produced nearly to blade apex, the outer ones shorter, all pinnately branched and the secondary nervules giving rise to a coarse open reticulum, the outermost venules brochidodrome just within the margin.
Peduncles (1-)2- 7 cm, solitary and geminate in the axU of a broad stipule and at random nodes paired with a short floriferous branchlet; capitula without filaments 10-12 X 9-10 mm, prior to anthesis moriform and setulose; receptacle hispid; bracts membranous elliptic 4.5-5 x 1.5 mm, faintly striatenerved, thinly setose dorsaUy above middle, ciliate with plain setae to ±1.5 mm and much shorter gland-tipped setulae; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate 0.25-0.3 mm, the obscurely angulate rim minutely setulose; corolla vase-shaped 4.5- 4.8 mm, the tube glabrous, the ovate 1-nerved lobes 1.7-1.9 X 1.1-1.2 mm, a little thickened at incurved tip, setose dorsally beyond middle; filaments pink, monadelphous through 1-1.3 mm, the longer set exserted ± 5 mm; ovary minutely stipitate.
Pods ± 2-7 per capitulum, stipitate, in profile oblong-elUptic ±20-25 x 8-9 mm, 2-3-seeded, acuminately contracted at base into the stipe to 5 mm and at apex into an erect cusp about as long, the replum ±0.8 mm wide, the papery valves coUiculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike hispid with erect tapering plain setae to ±4.5 mm mixed with shorter gland-tipped ones, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling articles ± 8-9 mm long; seeds not seen.
In sandy campo at ±650-700 m, known only from n. end of Sa. de Amambay close to the Brazilian frontier at Estrella, depto. Amambay, Paraguay (22°20'S, 55°55'W).-n. I-H. D(ix).
Series PIRESIANAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Habbasia ser. Piresianae Bameby, ser. nov., nulli manifeste affinis, his signis autem perspicua: foliis foliolisque maximis (foliolis 2-7 X 1 — 4 cm usque), stipulis subfoliaceis firmis extus enervosis, inflorescentia amplissime paniculatim pseudoracemosa efoliata, et prasertim calyce paleaceo-pappiformi.—Sp. typica: M. piresii Bameby.
Macrophyllidious unarmed shrubs with few, exceptionally ample leaves and long efoliate terminal panicles of globose capitula.
Indumentum of minute villi and tapering, either smooth or scabemlous, basifixed setae, nowhere glandularsetulose (but stems of M. macropogon resinous).
Stipules ample firm or subfoliaceous, the venation immersed.
Leaf-formula i-vi/5-10, the larger lfts ±2-7 X 1 — 4 cm.
Capitula prior to anthesis either moriform or conelike; flowers 4-merous 8-androus; calyx paleaceous-pappiform; corolla 2.6-3.4 mm, its 1-nerved lobes involute; filaments either cream-white or pink, shortly monadelphous.
Pods either subsessile or shortly stipitate, in profile linear 5-8 mm wide, 5-12-seeded, the replum 0.4-2 mm wide, the valves breaking up, in M. kuhlmannii tardily, into individually indehiscent articles.
Spp. 3, of campo and savanna habitats around and within the s. periphery of Brazilian Amazonia in s.-e. Amazonas, Rondonia, n. Mato Grosso and s. Para.
The series Piresianae, no member of which was known to Bentham, is an isolated group of unknown immediate affinity in sect. Habbasia.
The firm stipules with immersed venation recall ser. Pachycarpae, but the paniculate efoliate infforescence of small capitula and the craspedial dehiscence of the pod are incompatible with that series.
The ample leaves are comparable to those of monotypic ser. Pseudocymosae, but this differs in striate stipules, partly viscid-setular indumentum, and membranous, minutely ciliolate calyx.
A paleaceous-pappiform calyx coinciding in M. piresii and M. kuhlmannii with scabrous setae and in the latter also with unijugate pinnae forcibly suggests a connection, across sectional boundaries, with some haplostemonous members of sect. Mimosa subser. Polycephalae.
It seems possible that the difficulty in finding a connection between ser. Piresianae and any other group within sect. Habbasia may be due to recombination of characters derived in part from some Eu-mimosa with paleaceous calyx.
A similar origin is postulated in the case of M. (sect. Mimosa) subser. Discobolae, in which is found the singular combination of haplostemonous ffowers, paleaceous calyx, and habbasia-like foliage.
Conspectus of ser. Piresianae Mimosa * Pinnae 4-6-jug. 297. piresii Bameby 298. macropogon Bammeby ** Pinnae 1-jug. 299. kuhlmannii Hoehne Key to species of ser. Piresianae Lf-stks 9-30 cm; lf-formula iv-vii/5-9; replum of pod at most 1 mm wide.
2.
Stems strigose-pilose with antrorsely incurved or subappressed setae less than 2 mm; stipules 3-6 mm; larger lfts 20-35 x 10-25 mm; floral bracts 2.5-4.5 mm; pod subsessile 25-42 x 5-6 mm, 5- 8-seeded; s.-centr. Para, adj. Mato Grosso, and far n. Goias 297.
M. piresii (p. 487).
2.
Stems hispid with horizontally spreading setae to 7-13 mm; stipules amply foliaceous 15-35 mm; larger lfts 40-70 x 30-40 mm; floral bracts less than 1.5 mm; pod shortly stipitate, the body 60- 80 X 8 mm, 8-12-seeded; middle Madeira Basin in s.-e. Amazonas. ... 298.
M. macropogon (p. 488).
Lf-stks 2.5-4 cm; lf-formula i/7-10; replum of pod 1.5-2 mm wide; centr. Rondonia 299.
M. kuhlmannii (p. 488).
297.
Mimosa piresii Bameby, sp. nov., nulli praeter M. macropogon speciei affinis, ab ea setis caulinis adscendentibus vel subappressis vix 2 (nec patulis 7-13 usque) mm longis, stipulis 4-5-pio minoribus 3-6 (nec 35 usque) mm longis, foliolis utrinque setulosis (nec supra glabratis) diversa.—Brazil.
Para: perto do rio Xingu, ±52°W, 8°S, 27.
VI.1978 (ff ineunte), /.
Murqa Pires 16067. —Holotypus, NY (2 sheets); isotypus, MG.—Mato Grosso: Mun. de Colider, Sa. do Chamibo a 30 km da cidade deGuaranta,9°35'S,54°55'W, 19.
IV.1983(fr), M. N Silva & al. 27.-Paratypi, K, MG, NY, UB, US. Stout, amply leafy macrophyllidious, erect or sometimes subsarmentose shrubs or subshrubs attaining 12 dm or more, with few large lvs below or mostly below mid-stem, strigose-pilose throughout with forwardly incurved or subappressed tapering, minutely scabemlous setae ±0.5-1.5 mm, the foliage bicolored, the dried lfts dark brown sublustrous but setulose above, beneath paler brown and, especially along primary nerves, more densely pubescent, the paniculate-thyrsiform efoliate infforescence rising up to 9 dm above foliage.
Stipules firm, lanceovate 3-6 X 2-3 mm, densely setose dorsally, glabrous within, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 9-18 cm, the petiole 3-6 cm, at middle 2-3 mm diam., subterete, the interpinnal segments 1.5-3.3 mm; pinnae 4-7-jug., a little accrescent distally, their often backwardly arched rachis (5-)6-10 cm, the interfoliolar segments mostly 10-18 mm; lfts 5- 9-jug., little or markedly accrescent distally, the subequilong first pair 3-6 mm distant from subulate paraphyUidia 1-1.5 mm, the blades obliquely oblong-eUiptic, ovate or obovate, obtuse but minutely apiculate, (17-)20-35 x 10-25 mm, 1.4-2 times as long as wide, at base deeply cordate on proximal side and shallowly so or merely rounded on distal one, the plane margin strigulose Uke the faces, the dorsal face palmately (3-)4- 5-nerved from short pulvinule, the stout straight midrib displaced to divide blade ± 1:1.5-2, pinnately 4-6-branched from below middle, the inner posterior nerve produced beyond mid-blade, the outer primary nerves short and weak.
Peduncles solitary and 2-3 per node, (0.7-) 1-2.5 cm, 1-3-bracteolate above middle or immediately below the globose capitulum, this prior to anthesis conelike, the ellipsoid receptacle becoming 2-3 X 1.5-2 mm; bracts linear-oblanceolate or spatulate 2-3 x 0.3-0.4 mm, densely silkysetulose distally, about as long as the densely silky ^-buds; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 1.5-2.7 mm, the extemally glabrous or setulose tube 0.3- 0.5 mm, the lobes decompound nearly to base into stiff whitish setae to ±1.1-1.5 mm; corolla narrowly turbinate 3-3.8 mm, the tube glabrous extemaUy, the ovate involute 1-nerved lobes 1.2- 1.6 X 0.8-1 mm, densely setulose extemally; filaments pink or seemingly whitish, monadelphous through 0.5-1.3 mm below the ovary, exserted ± 3.5-5.5 mm.
Pods to nine per capitulum, subsessile, when well fertilized undulately linear in profile 25-42 x 5-6 mm, 5-8-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.6-1 mm wide, the stiffly papery valves low-convex over each seed, the replum and valves alike strigose overall with subappressed scabemlous setae to ± 1 mm long and to ±0.2 mm diam. at dilated base, these mixed with a few short capiUary trichomes, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 5-7 mm long; seeds compressed-obovoid ± 4 x 3 mm, the testa dull brown.
In open stony campo, sometimes near rock outcrops, ±300 mm, local between 6°-9°35'S and 48°-55°W in s. Para and immediately adj. Mato Grosso (middle Xingu valley s.-w. to Sa. do Cachimbo) and far n. Goias (Cachoeira dos Martirios on rio Araguaia) in Amazonian Brazil.- Fl. (?-)III-VII(-?).
Ample leaves that resemble, except for setose indumentum and lack of nectary, those of M. (Mimadenia) pithecolobioides are combined in M. piresii with an effusely branching panicle of small globose capitula, a pappiform calyx, and basally monadelphous filaments.
In collections from southem Para and Mato Grosso the calyx tube is glabrous extemally and the .filaments appear to have been white, whereas in those from northem Goias the calyx is silky-setose externally and the petals are reported pink.
298.
Mimosa macropogon Bameby, sp. nov., ab affini M. piresii caulibus cum foliomm axibus setis longissimis patulis 7-13 mm usque longis hispidis, stipulis maximis 3.5 cm usque (nec 4-6 mm) longis, foliolis subduplo majoribus necnon calycis tubo extus sericeo-striguloso (nec glabro) insigniter diversa.—Brazil.
Amazonas: "Estrada do Estanho," road to Igarape Preto ±60-62 km s.-e. of Transamazon Highway, 3.
Vn.l979 (ff jun), Cleofe E. Calderon (with O. P. Monteiro & J. Guedes) 2759.— Holotypus, US; isotypi, K, NY.
Fig.
20.
Amply macrophyllidious shrubs, unarmed and eglandular, including the far-exserted efoliate panicle of small globose capitula attaining 2-5 m, the stout terete stems and lf-axes at once puberulent and hispid with slender erect mfous setae to 7-13 mm and at base 0.1-0.3 mm diam., the fresh stems resinous (staining drying papers), the axes of panicle pubemlent and much more shortly setulose, the stiffly papery, when dry dull brown lfts palmately venose and reticulate, the panicle at least 4 and to 11 dm long (not seen entire) with longer branches to 2-3 dm.
Stipules stiffly foliaceous erect, broadly lanceolate or triangular, to 1.5-3.5 cm long, densely ascendingsetose dorsaUy, persistent.
Leafstalks to ±17- 30 cm, near base 3-6 mm diam., the petiole and interpinnal segments 4.5-6.5 cm, the terminal appendage lance-caudate 1.5-2 cm; interpinnal spicules not seen; pinnae 4-5-jug., the laterally compressed rachis of distal pairs 15-17.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 3-5.5 cm; lfts 6-7(-8)-jug., only a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair ± 15-20 mm distant from grossly dilated livid pulvinule (paraphyllidia 0), the blades obUquely ovate from inequilateral cordate base, broadly obtuse or shallowly emarginate and mucronulate at apex, plane-margined, the longer ones attaining 4-7 x (2-)2.5-4 cm, all flabellately 7-9-nerved from pulvinule, the straight midrib dividing blade ±1:2, severalbranched upward from below middle, the inner of two anterior primary nerves and the inner posterior one incurved and brochidodrome beyond mid-blade, the outer ones weaker and shorter, all primary and secondary nerves further branched into an open reticulum bluntly prominulous on both faces, but a little more sharply so beneath than above.
Peduncles 2-4 per node, to 10-22 mm, ebracteolate, each fascicle subtended by a pair of ovate, dorsally setulose deciduous bracts; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the flbuds densely setulose; bracts oblong less than 1.2 mm, setulose externally; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, at least some lower ones staminate; calyx pappiform 1.1-1.4 mm, the shallowly campanulate tube 0.4-0.45 mm, densely silky-strigulose extemally, the rim densely setose-ciliate; corolla turbinate 2.6-2.8 mm, the ovate cymbiform but scarcely thickened lobes 0.9 x 0.6 mm, densely sericeous dorsally; filaments creamwhite, monadelphous through 0.5-0.65 mm, exserted ±6 mm; anthers 0.35 mm diam.; style longer than stamens.
Pods narrowly linear in profile 60-80 X 8 mm, 8-12-seeded, contracted at base into a stipe 2-4 mm, the replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, the brown papery valves low-convex over each seed, glabrous, transversely venulose, breaking up when ripe into free-falling indehiscent articles 6-7 mm long. In savanna at low elevations, locally common in the middle Madeira basin near 62°-63°W in s.-e. Amazonas (mun. Humaita; rio Marmelos) and adj. T. F. Rondonia, Brazil.—R. VIIVIII(-?).
Mimosa macropogon is related closely only to the ecologically similar M. piresii but is notably different in the extremely large stipules and reticulately venose leaflets, the indumentum of extremely long cauline setae, and the extemally setulose calyx.
299.
Mimosa kuhlmannii Hoehne, Com. lin. telegr., Bot. 2: 7, t. 181,1922.-"No2026,7<:w/z/- mann, Cataqui-Iamain (Campos dos Urupas), Rondonia [=Cataqueama, ± 1 riO'S, 63°10'W], noroeste de Matto-Grosso, em Dezembro de FIG. 20.
Mimosa macropogon Bameby.
A. Half a leaf.
B. Rowering panicle.
C. Bract + flower.
D. Pods (A, D from L. O. A. Teixeira 1262; B, C from Calderon 2759.) 490 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 1918."—Holotypus, SP (not seen); isotypi, R! RB! = NY Neg. 12245.
Stiffly few-branched, unarmed, macrophyllidious shrub 2-3 m tall, densely silky-strigose throughout with forwardly subappressed, thinly barbeUate or scabemlous,flageUiformsetae, those of stems pale brownish and to 0.2 mm at dilated base, those of lfts pallid and less than 0.1 mm diam. at base, the ample foliage gray-olivaceous subconcolorous, the inflorescence a simple or fewbranched, efoliate, terminal pseudoraceme of smaU globose capitula exserted 3-5 dm above the lvs.
Stipules firm, triangular-lanceolate subacute 3-9 X 1.5-4 mm, densely setulose dorsally like adjacent stem, glabrous and striately venulose within, readily deciduous in age, those of inflorescence deciduous before anthesis.
Leafstalks stout 2.5-4 cm, at middle ±1.5-2 mm diam., shallowly sulcate ventrally, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 7-12 cm, the interfoliolar segments 10-14 mm; lfts (7-)8-10-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the inner member of first pair smaller but paraphyllidia 0, the blades all obliquely ovate or semi-ovate from broadly auriculate base, obtuse or deltately subacute at apex, the longer ones 2-3.5 x 0.8-1.4 cm, all 3-nerved from pulvinule, the slender simple or faintly branched midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2-2.5, the inner posterior nerve expiring beyond mid-blade, the outer posterior ones short and faint, the venation only slightly prominulous on either face, emphasized beneath by indumentum denser than that of the intervenium.
Peduncles mostly fasciculate by 3-5 per node, the longer ones 16-28 mm; capitula without filaments 6-7.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the plumply obovoid fl-buds densely silky-strigulose; bracts broadly oblanceolate obtuse 1.2-0.7 mm, concave distally, silky externally like the fl-buds, glabrous within; flowers 4-merous 8-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx pappiform 1.2-1.4 mm, the shaUow-campanulate brown tube ±0.25 mm, the lobes decompound into a fringe of fine lustrous setae; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.7-3.5 mm, the tube glabrous extemally, the oblong-ovate obtuse cymbiform lobes ±1.3-1.5 X 0.7 mm, sericeous extemaUy; filaments pink, monadelphous around the pilosulous ovary into a tube 1.4-1.6 mm, exserted 6-8 mm, the style slightly longer.
Pods 1-8 per capitulum, erect sessile, in profile Unearoblong 24-30 X 7.5-9 mm, cuneate at base, abmptly apiculate distally, the almost straight replum 1.5-2 mm diam., the firm subturgid valves low-convex over 4-6 seeds, the replum and valves alike very densely strigose with forwardly subappressed brownish flagelliform setae to 0.3 mm diam. at dilated base and 1-1.8 mm long, the valves apparently falling from replum in one piece, perhaps tardily disarticulating (ex char.), and charged within with oblique interseminal septa ±0.2-0.3 mm wide.
In campo near 600 m, known only from the type-locality near the e. end of Sa. dos Pacaas Novos in centr. Rondonia, Brazil.—Fl.
X-I(-?).
Hoehne's elegant portrait that forms part of the protologue of M. kuhlmanii portrays its unique syndrome ofample conjugate-pinnae, basally puberulent setae, virgate pseudoraceme of moriform capitula, small pappiform calyx, and diplostemonous flowers.
E. Sectio MIMOSA Mimosa Linnaeus sect. Mimosa.
Mimosa Linnaeus, 1753, I.e., sens, str.—Typus jam sub genere Mimosa indicatur.
M. sect. Eumimosa DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 425.
1825 & Mem. Legum. magn. ex parte, emend.
Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 359.
1841, omnino nisi ser. Lepidotae quae supra sectioni autonomae Calothamno transfertur.
M. sect. Eumimosa sensu Bentham, 1875: 388, max. ex parte, ser. Lepidotis et Spicifloris exclusis.
Flowers (either capitate or seldom spicate) 4-merous 4-androus (rare random anomalous fls at base of capitula in few spp.); indumentum of stems and lf-axes in part or wholly of plain setae, the lfts (except in few, otherwise glabrate spp.) set(ul)ose-ciliate.
Fruit most commonly a craspedium of 2-5, exceptionally 8 articles, but valvately dehiscent, either principally along dorsal suture or downward from apex, in ser. Myriophyllae and in few spp. or small subser. of ser. Mimosa (Dolentes, Microcarpae, Pogocephalae; Mm. glabra, widgrenii, perhaps sceptrum).
The section Mimosa is coextensive with sect. Eumimosa of Bentham's revision (1875) if shom of the two exceptional series Lepidotae and Spiciflorae.
These are both isostemonous like the core of sect. Mimosa, but the suppression of the antepetalous set of stamens is thought to have 19^1] BARNEBY: SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (M/M(95yi) 491 occurred independently in each.
The Spiciflorae, sharply focused, but it remains highly heterowhich may have either a tetramerous or a pengeneous intemally.
It still includes Bentham's setamerous perianth, lack the setiform trichomes ries Castae, Hirsutae, Meticulosae (or Dolentes characteristic of Eumimosa as here defined and, of this revision), Modestae, Myriophyllae, Obas Bentham noted (1875: 407), have a growthstrigosae, Pedunculosae, Pectinatae, Pudicae and habit and a fmit more compatible with that of Sensitivae (^Mimosa sens. str.).
The ser. Myriothe diplostemonous groups; they are here transphyllae stands apart from most other eu-miferred, under the prior epithet Plurijugae, to sect, mosas in high number of pinnae per leaf comBatocaulon.
The ser. Lepidotae, notable in parbined with basipetally valvate dehiscence of the ticular for their indumentum of plumose or stelsmaU persistent fmits.
Moreover most of them liform setae and, with few exceptions, for ochin aspect recall sect. Habbasia ser. Pachycarpae, roleucous or distinctly yellow filaments unknown to which they may indeed be related.
The series elsewhere in the genus, are also always functionis retained at the taxonomic level proposed by ally isostemonous; but the flowers of several reBentham.
The Modestae are unique among eutain rudiments of the inner antepetalous whorl mimosas in the development of retractile joints of filaments.
It is postulated that the Lepidotae in the pinna-rachis.
I propose to retain this series arose independently of sect. Mimosa directly from also as defined by Bentham.
The residue of sect, spicate diplostemonous antecedents in or close Eumimosa forms a taxonomically indigestible to sect. Batocaulon.
They appear herein as the complex of more than 150 species for which a autonomous sect. Calothamnos. tentative but as yet admittedly incomplete reWith ser. Lepidotae and Spiciflorae disposed organization is proposed under the title of ser. of, Bentham's sect. Eumimosa becomes more Mimosa, q.v. (p. 506).
Conspectus of series of sect. Mimosa Mimosa II Rachis of pinnae unmodified between pairs of Ift-pulvinules; pinnae always 2-several pairs and inflorescence (1 exception) a terminal raceme; fruit valvate.
E(i). ser. Myriophyllae Bentham n Rachis of pinnae as in H; pinnae mostly 1 pair, when more than 1 pair either the capitula axillary, or the fruit a craspedium.
E(ii). ser. Mimosa 1 1 1 1 1 1 Rachis of pinnae interrupted between pinna-pair(s) by a discolored band of contractile tissue; pinnae either 1 or 2 pairs, when 2 pairs palmate from tip of lf-stk; fruit a craspedium.
E(iii). ser. Modestae Bentham Key to series of sect. Mimosa I. Rachis of pinnae continuous between pairs of Ift-pulvinules, when shocked or in sleep-position variably oriented but not incurved on itself.
2.
Pinnae 2-several pairs; inflorescence almost always a terminal, sometimes proximally leaf-bracteate pseudoraceme (the partial inflorescence axillary and spiciform in anomalous M. balduinii); calyx paleaceous-pappiform (2 exceptions); fmit valvately dehiscent from apex downward; Brazil s.-ward from centr. Minas Gerais, w. to Paraguay and n.-e. Argentina E(i). ser. Myriophyllae (p. 492).
2.
Pinnae 1-several pairs, in most species exactly 1 pair, when more than one pair the partial inflorescence a capitulum and the capitula all axillary, or the calyx minute, or the fruit a craspedium (or some combination ofthese characters); ofextensiveNeotropical dispersal and in S. America extending into warm-temperate Brazil and Argentina, most numerous and diverse s. of Amazonia, one widely naturalized in the paleotropics E(ii). ser. Mimosa (p. 506).
1.
Rachis of pinnae interrupted at insertion of pinna-pair(s) by a discolored band of contractUe tissue, when shocked or in sleep-position articulated like a clenched finger; herbs (some monocarpic) and one slender shmblet of discontinuous dispersal in tropical N. America, the Greater AntUles, and e. Brazil mostly s. of Amazonia E(iii). ser. Modestae (p. 763).
E(i).
Series MYRIOPHYLLAE Bentham Mimosa sect. Mimosa ["Eumimosa"] ser. Myriophyllae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 384.
1841.—Sp. lectotypica: M. myriophylla Bongard ex Bentham.
M. SQr.
MyriophyllaesensuBentham, 1875: 406,1876: 342.
Microphyllidious, sometimes arborescent shrubs and virgate subshrubs, some unarmed, some armed with immediately infrastipular and random intemodal, straight aculei.
Indumentum potentially of 3 elements: a) appressed or widely spreading, smooth or scabemlous, basifixed or seldom basally spurred, sometimes flagelliform setae; (b) fine pubemlence; and c) granular (but no glandular) trichomes, these sometimes 0.
Stipules linear or lanceolate, 1-3-nerved.
Leafformula (ii-)iii-xxiv/15-75(-80); spicules 0; paraphyllidia subulate; longer lfts (1.7-)2-9(-l 1) X 0.5-3 mm, extemally either veinless or dorsally l-3(-^)-nerved.
Inflorescence most often an exserted, simple or few-branched pseudoraceme of capitula, these mostly globose and prior to anthesis moriform (in M. chartostegia conelike), the capitula in M. balduinii at once axillary and amentiform; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx mostly paleaceous-pappiform 1-3 mm, the decompund lobes in M. callidryas less than 1 mm, and the calyx simply campanulate short-toothed in atypical M. glazioui and M. balduinii; corolla narrow, 1.9-2.5 mm, the 1-nerved lobes either cymbiform or nearly plane; filaments free or united into a stemonozone less than 0.4 mm; style commonly as long as the lilac-pink filaments but in M. myriophylla and M. callidryas included and the filaments then red and their anthers enlarged.
Pods (unknown in M. chartostegia, M. deceptrix and M. glazioui) commonly several or many per capitulum, l-4(-5)-ovulate and -seeded, the replum 0.4-1 mm wide, the ripe valves usually separating basipetally in one piece from replum but adherent at base, gaping to release the seeds, in M. altoparanensis perhaps tardily articulate.
Spp. 10, of southeastem Brazil, from centr. Minas Gerais to Rio Grande do Sul, immediately adj. Argentina, and s.-e. Paraguay, most numerous in Parana and Sta. Catarina, one on Sa. dos Orgaos in Rio de Janeiro.
The series Myriophyllae, disregarding for the moment some anomalous elements mentioned below, are distinguished in sect. Mimosa by a syndrome of pinnae in several pairs scattered along the leaf-stalk (not crowded together beyond its midpoint), globose capitula, paleaceous-pappiform calyx, and small few-seeded, valvately dehiscent pod.
This set of features characterizes the first eight species listed in the conspectus of the series, with the exception that the pod-valves of M. altoparanensis may break tardily into freefalling articles.
Numbered among these eight are species consistently armed, species never armed, and in the case of M. micropteris either armed or not, but the aculei, when present, are always few, straight or almost so, and bome 1-3 per intemode either close to or variably displaced downward from the nodes.
The unarmed species are strongly reminiscent of some members of the diplostemonous sect. Habbasia ser. Pachycarpae, while the small valvate fmits, usually numerous in each capitulum, suggest a connection with haplostemonous and incidentally sympatric ser. Mimosa subser. Dolentes.
I can detect no close connection to any other group in ser. Mimosa.
Within the core of eight species two are peculiar, not only in their series but in the genus, for modified bisexual flowers, of which the style is reduced in length and the anthers are of relatively great size, bome on filaments of an unusual red color.
The pollination of this pair might repay careful observation.
As first described, ser. Myriophyllae consisted of one species of each type, dolichostylous M. micropteris and brachystylous M. myriophylla, a nucleus to which Bentham later added dolichostylous M. regnellii.
The remainder have been recognized either by Chodat and Hassler, or by Burkart, or in this work.
Two rare and ill-documented Mimosae compatible with ser. Myriophyllae as envisaged by Bentham but discordant in one or more characters are here provisionally included in the series: M. glazioui and M. balduinii.
They differ collectively from the core of ser. Myriophyllae in simply campanulate, not pappiform calyx, and M. balduinii differs further in spicate flowers bome in leaf-axils of young branches.
Mimosa glazioui, described by Bentham as a member of ser. Pectinatae but transferred to Myriophyllae by Burkart in discussion of M. balduinii, will rest uneasily in any association until its fmit becomes known.
Its few but scattered pinna-pairs and fru- 19^1] BARNEBY: SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (M/Af05/i) 493 tescent habit agree with Myriophyllae well formula, in ser. Myriophyllae are Bolivian M. enough, and the calyx is neariy that of M. balwilliamsii (p. 521) and North American M. teleduinii.
Its habitat high on the Sa. dos Orgaos dactyla(p. 533), which see for commentary.
Mzpoints to affinity with a series adapted, as are the mosa widgrenii, referred by Harms to ser. MyrioMyriophyllae, to upland or, if lowland, then exphyllae, here constitutes a monotypic subseries tratropical BrazU. of ser. Mimosa (p. 506).
Species that might be sought, because of leafConspectus of ser. Myriophyllae Mimosa * Calyx paleaceous-pappiform; style elongate, ± as long as pink-lUac filaments; anthers 0.25-0.6 mm diam.; stems armed or not, aculei when present interor infranodal, straight.
300. regnellii Bentham a. var. regnellii b. var. exuta Bameby c. var. supersetosa (Burkart) Bameby d. var. grossiseta Bameby 301. micropteris Bentham a. var. micropteris h. var. pungens (Burkart) Bameby 302. deceptrix Bameby 303. chartostegia Bameby 304. candelabrum Hassler 305. altoparanensis Burkart * Calyx paleaceous-pappiform; style less than 2 mm, much shorter than red filaments; anthers 0.7-0.9 mm diam.; aculei 0.
306. myriophylla Bongard ex Bentham.
307. callidryas Bameby *** Calyx campanulate, short-toothed; fls capitate; aculei interand infranodal.
308. glazioui Bentham **** Calyx campanulate, short-toothed; fls spicate; aculei infranodal.
309. balduinii Burkart Key to species of ser. Myriophyllae Fls crowded into capitula not over 1.5 times as long as diam., often globose.
2.
Stems either unarmed or randomly armed with pairs of mostly straight infrastipular aculei, or with straight intemodal aculei, these not more than 2 per intemode, the lf-stks never armed; coroUa lobes antrorsely strigulose; most or all capitula in exserted efoliate pseudoracemes, rarely clustered near If-tips.
3.
Style 6 mm or longer, ± as long as or a little longer than the pink or lUac filaments; anthers 0.35- 0.6 mm diam. 4.
Variable in habit and stature, but if virgate and functionally herbaceous then usually less than 1.5 dm tall; e. Brazil, from s. Minas Gerais to Rio Grande do Sul, most abundant and diverse in e. Parana.
5.
Capitula prior to anthesis moriform, the bracts l-3(-3.3) x 0.2-0.5 mm.
6.
Midrib of lfts displaced to divide blade ±1:2 and accompanied on posterior side only by 1-3 short primary nerves.
7.
Lf-formula of larger lvs ii-iii/16-22; Sa. dos Orgaos, Rio de Janeiro; calyx campanulate, short-toothed 308.
M. glazioui (p. 505).
7.
Lf-formula of larger lvs iv-xiii/15-36; s. Minas Gerais to Sta. Catarina; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 300.
M. regnellii (p. 494).
6.
Midrib of lfts centric or almost so, either solitary or accompanied on each side by a primary nerve.
8.
Bushy shrubs and treelets with densely foliate homotinous branchlets and inflorescences exserted 0.5-2.5 dm; lf-stks 3-10 cm and pinnae 4-12-jug 301.
Af. micropteris (p. 496).
8.
Virgate subshrubs with distandy few-lvd homotinous stems and with inflorescences exserted 5-8 dm; lf-stks 9-16 cm and pmnae 12-16-jug. .. 302.
M. deceptrix (p. 498).
5.
Capitula prior to anthesis conelike, the bracts 3-5.5 x 0.7-1.1 mm; local in e. Parana.
.
303.
M. chartostegia (p. 499).
4.
Tall virgate, functionally herbaceous subshrubs of swampy campo in s. Paraguay near and shortly below the Tropic of Capricorn, the densely leafy stem 1.5-4 m. 9.
Stems unarmed; lf-stk of lvs near and above mid-stem ±3.5-10 cm, the pinnae mostly 5-10-jug.; rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-8 cm, their lfts (40-)45-80-jug.; capitula mostly solitary, without filaments 8-10 mm diam.; corollas ±3-4.5 mm 304.
M. candelabrum (p. 500).
9.
Stems erratically armed at or below nodes with stout infrastipular aculei; lf-stk of lvs near and above mid-stem 1.5-4.5 cm, the pinnae 4-7-jug.; rachis of longer pinnae 2^.5 cm, their lfts 20-30-jug.; capitula mostly 2-4 per node, without filaments ±6 mm diam.; corollas 2-2.4 mm 305.
M. altoparanensis (p. 501).
3.
Style less than 2 mm long, much less than half as long as the dark red filaments, either included in coroUa or exserted less than 1 mm; anthers 0.7-0.9 mm diam. 10.
Lfts of longer pinnae 40-60-jug.; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 1.3-2.2 mm; discontinuously dispersed from centr. Minas Gerais to e. S. Paulo and from s. Paraguay through adj. Argentina to w. Rio Grande do Sul 306.
M. myriophylla (p. 502).
10.
Lfts of longer pinnae ±30-38-jug; calyx pappiform, the tube fringed with minute setulae to 0.2-0.6 mm; e. Parana and adj. S. Paulo 307.
M. callidryas (p. 504).
2.
Stems and lf-stks at once setose and serially retro-aculeate; most capitula axillary to developed lvs, only a few distal ones pseudoracemose.
11.
Pinnae 5-10-jug.; calyx paleaceous-pappiform, the rim with setae 1-1.4 mm; pod of ser. Myriophyllae, 1-2-seeded, the valves opening in one piece; herbaceous ± 1 m; s. Minas Gerais; cf. M. widgrenii (p. 762).
11.
Pinnae 2-4-jug., calyx 0.2-0.3 mm, glabrous or minutely ciliolate; pod a 3-5-seeded craspedium; vines 1-2 m; s.-e. Peru and e. Bolivia; cf M. williamsii (p. 521).
1.
Fls spicate; treelets of Sa.
Geral in n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, armed at nodes with infrastipular aculei; lf-formula iii-v/20-26; pod densely setose overall, valvately dehiscent, the valves very tardily segmented 309.
M. balduinii (p. 506).
300.
Mimosa regnellii Bentham, Linnaea 22: 0.7-1.5 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 3- 529.
1849.—Typus infra sub var. regnellii in- 11(-15) mm; pinnae 4-13-jug., subequilong or a dicatur. little decrescent at each end of lf-stk, the rachis of longer ones (1.2-) 1.5-5 cm, the interfoliolar Erect, amply microphyllidious unarmed shrubs segments 0.4-1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 15- with defoliate tmnks, including inflorescence 5- 36-jug., subequilong except at very ends of ra- 12(-20) dm tall, the densely leafy, simple or fewchis, the blades narrowly lance-oblong, obliquely branched homotinous stems terminating in a elliptic, or semi-ovate from semicordate base, at simple efoliate pseudoraceme of dense globose apex acute or apiculate, those near mid-rachis capitula exserted 1-4 dm from foliage, the stems, 3-7 x 1.1-2 mm, 2.2-4.7 times as long as wide, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence either densely all weakly (2-)3(-4)-nerved from pulvinule, the hispid with erect-incurved setae or densely strisimple midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, gose with forwardly appressed ones, the setae in the inner posterior nerve expiring near or beyond either case at least proximaUy scaberulous, pallid mid-blade, the exterior 1 or 2 much shorter, none or mfescent and to 0.6-2 mm, mixed with fine branched, the venation either immersed and disshort pubemlence, the subconcolorous lfts either colored, or bluntly prominulous on one or both finely pubemlent on both faces, or sometimes faces.
Peduncles 1-3 per node 4-16 mm; capitula glabrate ventraUy, or glabrous on both faces, their without filaments 5-8 mm diam., prior to antheforwardly setose-ciliate margin continuously palsis moriform, the fl-buds gray-puberulent; receplid but not corneous-rimmed.
Stipules firm erect tacle setose; bracts narrowly lance-elliptic or linlanceolate 3-10 X 0.6-2 mm, densely pubescent ear-oblanceolate 1.5-3.3 x 0.2-0.5 mm, near dorsally like stem, pubemlent within, persistent, apex dorsally pubemlent and setose-ciliolate; Leaf-stalks 2-15 cm, the petiole 0.5-4.5 cm x flowers 4-merous 4-androus, aU or almost aU bisexual; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 1.7-2.9 mm, the lobes decompound almost or quite to base into lustrous setae; coroUa subtubular 2.5-3.2 mm, the concave but not much thickened lobes 0.7-0.85 X 0.4-0.5 mm, gray-pubemlent externally; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 4-4.5 mm; anthers 0.35-0.4 mm diam.; style about as long as filaments.
Pods numerous in each capitulum, sessile, obliquely obovate in profile, at apex broadly rounded or obliquely subtruncate, compressed but turgid, 4.5-10 X (3.5-)4-7mm(1-)2- seeded, the replum at broadest 0.5-1 mm wide, at maturity breaking apart at apex, the stiffly papery brown valves then basipetally dehiscent in one piece and gaping to release the seeds, remaining attached only at base, the cavity divided between the two ovules by a hyaline septum, the replum and valves alike densely hispid or less often strigose with basally dilated setae 0.5-3 mm; seeds (of var. regnellii, of the rest not seen) plumply obovoid ±3.5 x 2.5 mm, the testa dull chocolate-brown.
Bentham's concept of M. regnellii, of necessity narrow because based exclusively on RegnelFs plants from Caldas, is here materially enlarged southward to incorporate M. supersetosa Burkart and allied forms from Parana and Sta. Catarina.
When Burkart described M. supersetosa he compared it, not with true M. regnellii, which he knew primarily from description and from the plate in Flora brasiliensis, but with the then undescribed M. deceptrix, equivalent to the species that passes in Flora ilustrada catarinense as M. regnellii.
From M. deceptrix Burkart's new species is easily and properly distinguished, but from genuine M. regnellii it differs only in smaller, more condensed leaves, which lend it, however, a certain distinction of mien that coincides with extratropical dispersal.
The type-collections of M. regnellii have Unear-oblong leaffets proportionately narrower than those of M. supersetosa, but Sa. de Caldas later yielded (Mosen 1966, S) leaffets of semi-ovate type.
As ffowers and pods of M. regnellii and M. supersetosa are nearly identical it is no longer possible to maintain them as independent species.
In eastem Parana M. regnellii is subject to variation in indumentum and leaf-formula that appears related to dispersal and prompts me to distinguish, in addition to var. supersetosa, a glabrate var. exuta found in highland campo north and west of Curitiba, and from the neighborhood of Ponta Grossa a var. grossiseta, different in the coarsely dilated setae of leaf-stalks and in pod strigose with short bulbous-based setae.
Key to varieties of M. regnellii 1.
Lf-stks of longer lvs 6-15 cm, the petiole (1.5-)2-4.5 cm; lfts commonly but not quite consistently lance-oblong, the longer ones 4-7 x 1.1-1.8 mm, mostly 3^.7 times as long as wide.
2.
Lfts densely gray-pubemlent on both faces; s. Minas Gerais 300a. var. regnellii (p. 495).
2.
Lfts glabrous dorsally or on both faces; e. Parana 300b. var. exuta (p. 495).
1.
Lf-stks of longer lvs 2-6 cm, the petiole 0.5-1.5 cm; lfts obliquely elliptic or semi-ovate, the larger ones 3-5 X 1.2-2 mm, ±2.2-3 times as long as wide; s. S. Paulo to Sta. Catarina.
3.
Stems, dorsal face of lf-axes, and pod hispid with widely spreading-incurved setae not over 0.1-0.2 mm diam. at base; dispersal as just given 300c. var. supersetosa (p. 496).
3.
Stems, dorsal face of lf-axes, and pod strigose with appressed or subappressed, dilated or bulbous setae to 0.3-0.5 mm diam. at base; e. Parana 300d. var. grossiseta (p. 496).
300a. Mimosa regnellii Bentham var. regnellii.
M. regnellii Bentham, 1849, I.e., sens, str.— "Brazil (RegneU.)", the locality amplified in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 342, t. 85.
1875: "Habitat ad Caldas prov. Minas Geraes: RegneU coU.
II, n. 93."-Holotypus, K (ff, fr)! = NY Neg. 1837; isotypi, S (distingiushed as 93a, ff, and 93b, fr)! = NY Neg. 11844, P (fr)! US (fr)! M. regnellii sensu Bentham, 1875: 406; Glaziou, 1906: ISO (no. 8632a, F\).
Leaf-formula and pubescence as described in key to varieties.
In scarcely recorded habitats, but to be expected in campo thickets at 1100 m upward, known only from along and within the boundary of s. Minas Gerais (Caldas; Itatiaia).—Fl.
IXI(-?); fr long persistent.
300b. Mimosa regnellii Bentham var. exuta Barneby, var. nov., a var. regnellii foUolis utrinque vel saltem dorso glabris diversa.—Brazil.
Parana: Mun.
Rio Branco do Sul, Itapemgu, ad margines silvulae, 29.11.1912 (fr), P. Dusen 13869.-Holotypus, S = NY Neg. 11846.- Parana: Mun.
Palmeira, Fda.
Sta. Rita, 21.1.1982, P. I. Oliveira 300. -Paratypus, NY.
Closely resembling var. regnellii except in facially glabrous lfts.
At edge of campo thickets and near sandstone outcrops, known only from municipios of Ponta Grossa, Palmeira, and Rio Branco do Sul, about the sources of rio Ribeira in e. Parana, Brazil. — n. ix-n. 300c. Mimosa regnellii Bentham var. supersetosa (Burkart) Bameby, based on autonym generated by M. supersetosa var. rufohispidula Burkart, 1979, I.e. infra. M. supersetosa var. supersetosa Burkart in Reitz, Fl. ilustr. catarin.
LEGU(l): 245, est. 39, 40 + map.
1979.- "Santa Catarina: Irani, Rio Irani, 14-15 km east of Ponte Serrada, campo, 700-900 m, L. B. Smith & R. M. Klein 11.876 (26.02.1957)."-Holotypus, SI, not seen; isotypus, US!; paratypus, Hatschbach 10565, NY! M. supersetosa var. rufohispidula Burkart, 1979, op. cit. p. 250. —"Parana: Arapoti, by Jaguariaiva boundary, campo cerrado, 950 m, L. B. Smith, R. Klein & G. Hatschbach 14723 (17.01.1965)."
- Holotypus, SI, not seen; isotypi, NY! US! Leaf-formula and pubescence as described in key to varieties.
In moist campo, at margin of thickets and in capoeira, ±550-950 m, widely scattered between upper Itarare valley near 24°20'S in s. S. Paulo and the Umguai valley near 27°S in w. Sta. Catarina, BrazU.—Fl.
IX-II. The range of M. regnellii var. supersetosa is nearly coextensive with that of M. micropteris, but it differs in broader, distinctly 2-3-nerved leaffets pubemlent commonly on both faces, always so beneath.
It is described, also, as a smaller shmb, seldom surpassing one meter in height, including the virgate pseudoracemes.
In the few fmiting specimens seen the pod is shorter, 1-2- rather than 2-4-seeded; but I have vainly sought differences in calyx, which varies somewhat in depth of dissection, or in corolla.
Burkart described two varieties of M. supersetosa, supposed to differ not only in quality of setose vesture but also in size or length of leaf, raceme and capitulum.
The differences are blurred in the material seen by me and are moreover contradicted in Burkart's own detailed description of each variety.
I therefore evaluate var. rufohispidula as a minor variant of M. regnellii var. supersetosa.
300d. Mimosa regnellii Bentham var. grossiseta Bameby, var. nov., foliorum formula cum var. supersetosa omnino congruens, sed ab ea caulibus, foliomm axibus necnon legumine setis basi dilatatis bulbosisve 0.3-0.5 mm diam. antrorsus appressis strigoso diversa.—Brazil.
Parana: Mun.
Ponta Grossa, Lago, in campo, 7.
III.1904 (fr), P. Dusen 4134.-Yiolotypus, S = NY Neg. 11845.-Void.,
Vila Velha, 25.1.1910 (ff), P. Dusen 9114. -Paratypi, GH, NY, S. Like var. supersetosa except in basally dilated, forwardly appressed setae to 0.3-0.5 mm diam. at base, lfts densely gray-puberulent on both faces, and small strigose pod.
In wet campo, at elevations not recorded, apparently localized in mun. Ponta Grossa in upland e. Parana, Brazil.-Fl.
I-II(-?).
301.
Mimosa micropteris Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 384.
1841.—Typus infra sub var. micropteride indicatur.
Microphyllidious broad-crowned shrubs and bushy treelets 1-4 m, either unarmed or randomly armed at or below some nodes with straight infrastipular aculei 1-3.5 mm, the terete canaliculate stems, branchlets, lf-stks and axes of infforescence strigose with coarse, closely appressed, subterete or dorsally ffattened, pallid setae to 0.4-1.7 mm, sometimes in addition microscopically pubemlent, the concolorous foliage bmnnescent when dry, the thick-textured lfts either quite glabrous or along margin on each side with 1-7 fine appressed setulae (not continuously marginate), the infforescence a terminal simple pseudoraceme of globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula sometimes leafy-bracteate proximaUy but distally efoliate and exserted ±0.5-2(-2.5) dm from foliage.
Stipules firm erect thick-textured, linear-or triangular-subulate 1.5-5 X 0.5- 1.2 mm, 1-nerved distally, either glabrous or dorsaUy setose and setose-cUiate, persistent.
Leafstalks (2.5-)3-10 cm, the petiole including hard livid pulvinus 3-17 x 0.5-1.1 mm, the interpinnal segments 3-12(-14) mm, the ventral groove bridged at insertion of pinnae but spicules 0; pinnae 4-12(-l 3)-jug., subequilong, the rachis of longer ones 14-40 mm, the interfoUolar segments 0.3-1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20- 30(-33)-jug., subequUong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.2-0.6 mm distant from minute subulate paraphyllidia, the ventrally concave blades oblong-obovate or -elliptic and obtuse to minutely mucronulate or Unear-oblong and acute, those near mid-rachis (1.8-)2-6(-7) X 0.7-1.2 mm, the scarcely displaced midrib faintly discolored dorsally but not prominulous, a very short posterior venule sometimes also perceptible, but both faces otherwise veinless extemally.
Peduncles 1-3 per node and at most nodes geminate, (0.8-)l-3(-3.5) mm; capitula without filaments 5-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the receptacle setose, the ff-buds gray-pubemlent between the four glabrate keels; bracts linear-oblanceolate or -spatulate 1-1.8 x 0.25-0.35 mm, the livid tips pubemlent dorsally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx paleaceous-pappiform (1-) 1.2-1.6 mm, the lobes deeply decompound, sometimes to very base, into fine stramineous setae; corollas narrowly funnelform (1.9-)2-3.1 mm, the concave, sUghtly thickened lobes 0.65-0.9 x 0.4-0.55 mm, densely pubemlent extemally; filaments pink or lUac, free to base, exserted (3-)3.5-6 mm; anthers ±0.3 mm diam.; style as long as or longer than filaments; ovules commonly four.
Pods ±3-12 per capitulum sessile, oblong-eUiptic in profile, compressed but turgid and 3-4-seeded, when weU-fertilized 12-18 x 5-6.5 mm, the replum 0.7-0.9 mm wide, at maturity separating at apex, the stiffly papery valves low-colUculate over seeds, when ripe dehiscent basipetally from apex in one piece, remaining attached at base to receptacle, the septum and valves alike scabrous or hispid with forwardly appressed or ascending, basally grossly dilated setae to 0.7-1.4 mm, the valves smooth intemally except for narrow filamentous interseminal septa; ripe seeds not seen.
My present concept of Af. micropteris includes three taxa recognized by Burkart: M. micropteris sens, str., M. regnellii sensu Burkart (non Bentham), and M. regnellii var. pungens Burkart.
The two last are essentially alike except for the latter's infrastipular aculei occurring at random points along the branches, aculei that may be present or absent in stems from one collection (e.g., Reitz & Klein 17579, cited by Burkart, 1979: 252 as unarmed M. regnellii, but armed at NY); moreover their ranges are nearly coextensive.
Referred herein to M. micropteris var. pungens, these differ collectively from genuine M. micropteris only in the leaffets, which are short, broad and glabrous in the latter but a little longer, proportionately narrower, and finely setose-ciliolate in var. pungens.
Typical var. micropteris is allopatrically dispersed over a small tract of campo country to the north and east of var. pungens.
However, in the municipio of Guarapuava in Parana there occur populations in which leaflets proportionately proper to var. aculeata are either marginally glabrous like var. micropteris or weakly ciliolate, but in both cases coincide with aculeate branches.
Burkart suggested that one ofthese (Hatschbach 13380) might represent the hybrid M. micropteris x regnellii, but it is equally likely to be simply intermediate, the locality lying at the eastem edge of the range of var. pungens, adjacent to that of var. micropteris.
As here interpreted, M. micropteris is entirely extratropical, ranging southward from upper rio Itarare on the S. Paulo-Parana boundary to central and eastem Sta. Catarina.
The mature plants are shmbs, sometimes weakly arborescent, with several or many tmnks repeatedly branched upward into a broad crown of foliage from which the infforescences project about 0.5-2 dm.
The tme M. regnellii, which Burkart knew only from a photograph, came originally from Caldas in southem Minas Gerais, a point distant 300 km to the northeast of the northernmost known station for M. micropteris var. micropteris and 500 km northeast of the nearest for var. aculeata (=M. regnellii sensu Burkart, ex parte).
It is a relatively little known mimosa, apparently of the functionally herbaceous, virgate habit exemplified by M. myriophylla and M. candelabrum, but may be distinguished from M. micropteris even in truncated specimens by the forwardly displaced midrib of the leaffets.
Key to varieties of M. micropteris 1.
Lfts smaU and proportionately broad, obtuse, glabrous or rarely charged on each margin with 1-3 weak setulae, those at mid-rachis (1.8-)2-3 mm long and 2-3 times as long as wide; e. Parana and immediately adj. S. Paulo, about the sources of rios Itarare and Tibagi, m lat. ±24°-25°20'S, long. 40°20'-50*'20'W; plants unarmed 301a. var. micropteris (p. 498).
1.
Lfts longer and proportionately narrower, acute or mucronulate, charged on each margin with 3- 7 setulae, those at mid-rachis 3.5-6(-7) mm long and 4.5-7 times as long as wide; s.-centr. Parana to centr. and e. Sta. Catarina, in basins of rios Igua9u and Umguai, lat. 25*'20'-27°S, long. 50**- 53*20'W; plants either armed or not 301b. var. pungens (p. 498).
301a. Mimosa micropteris Bentham var. micropteris.
M. micropteris Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens, str.—"Brazil, S^/Zo."
-Lectotypus, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Benth.)!; presumed isotypi, ^B = F Neg. 1342 (Sello 5250), K (hb. Hook.)! W! M. micropteris sensu Bentham, 1875: 406; 1876: 343; Burkart, 1947: 539; 1979: 251-252.
Rachis of longer pinnae 14-26 mm; lfts as given in key to varieties.
In campo rupestre, thin campo cerrado, and about sandstone outcrops, 500-1200 m, apparently endemic to e. Parana and adj. S. Paulo, the range outlined in key to varieties.—Fl.
X-II, VVI.
301b. Mimosa micropteris Bentham var. pungens (Burkart) Bameby, comb. nov. M. regnellii var. pungens Burkart in Reitz, Fl. ilustr. catarin.
LEGU(l): 244.
1979.-"Santa Catarina: Abelardo Luz: 8 km n. of Abelardo Luz .
.
.
500-600 m. . .L.B.
Smith & R. M. Klein 11.463 (19.02.1957)."-Holotypus, SI, not seen; isotypus, US! Rachis of longer pinnae (18-)20-40 mm; lfts as given in key to varieties.
In campo, at edge of capao or pinhal, sometimes on riveror road-banks, ±450-1050 m, interruptedly widespread from s.-centr. Parana to centr. and far w. Sta. Catarina, the range outlined in key to varieties.—Fl.
XI-III. 302.
Mimosa deceptrix Bameby, sp. nov., a M. regnellii caeterius praesimili imprimis caule virgato medium usque distantius pauciac grandifoliato in infforescentiam efoliatam pseudoracemosam vel parce ramosam 5-8 dm longam abeunti, foliomm majomm pinnis 12- 16 (nec 7-13)-jugis foliolommque saepissime 30-46- (nec 15-36)-jugomm costa centrica necnon margine haud pallescenti sed concolori diversa.—Brazil.
Parana: Mun.
Lapa, Serrinha, 840 m, 4.1.1915 (fl), P. Dusen 16274.- Holotypus, NY; isotypi, GH, K, S. M. regnellii sensu Burkart, 1979: 243, minore ex parte (Hatschbach 10675); non Bentham.
Virgately erect, unarmed shrubs or subshrubs ±9-15 dm, the commonly simple stiff striate reddish-brown stems bearing below middle a few amply microphyllidious lvs sometimes subtending inhibited lateral branchlets and passing upward into a simple or few-branched, leaffess multicapitulate pseudoraceme rising 5-8 dm beyond the last If, the stems below middle either strigose or hispid with appressed or spreading-ascending, microscopically papillose-puberulent, tapering setae to 2-3.5 mm, distally like lf-stks and axis of pseudoracemes strigose with shorter subappressed setae often mixed with fine puberulence, the foliage when dry dull brown-olivaceous, the concolorous lfts microscopically pubemlent facially, weakly setose-ciliolate.
Stipules linearlance-attenuate 4-8 X 0.4-0.9 mm, 1-nerved distally, setose dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of primary lvs (7.5-)9-16 cm, the petiole including hard pulvinus 0.8-2.5 cm, at middle 0.7-1.4 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 7-12 mm, the ventral groove obscure, interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae (9-) 12-16-jug., subequilong or a little decrescent at either end of lf-stk, the rachis of longer ones 3-5.2 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.7- 1.4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (26-)30-46-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.3-0.5 mm distant from subulate-subsetiform paraphyllidia almost concealed in setae, the blades narrowly oblong from semicordate base, acute or mucronate at apex, those at and near mid-rachis 3.5-5 x 0.9-1.3 mm, 3-5(-5.5) times as long as wide, all veinless on upper face, beneath paUidly 1- or 3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric, simple or beyond middle weakly 1 (-2)-branched, the branches incurved and anastomosing with the weak primary nerve on each side.
Peduncles (1-)2-3 per node, at anthesis 8-14 mm; capitula subglobose, without filaments 5-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the ff-buds gray-pubemlent at tip; receptacle setose; bracts narrowly linear-oblanceolate 1.7-2.4 X 0.2-0.3 mm, subscarious, distally brownish and minutely or weakly ciliolate; y/ovvers 4-merous 4-androus, most or aU bisexual; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 1.6-2 mm, the lobes decompound nearly to base into lustrous setae; coroUa subcylindric 2.2-2.8 mm, the ovate concave, scarcely callous lobes 0.6-0.8 x 0.3-0.4 mm; filaments lilac-pink, free to base, exserted 5-6 mm; anthers 0.25-0.3 mm diam.; ovary at anthesis glabrous; style about as long as filaments; pod unknown.
In campo near 850-950 m, apparently local about the sources of rio Igua9u w. and s.-w. of Curitiba, Parana (Campo Largo; S. Jose dos Pinhaes; Quatro Barras; Araucaria; Serrinha).—Fl.
XI-II. This handsome campo mimosa, which was perceived by Per Dusen to be allied to but (in herbarium notation) different from M. regnellii, was mistaken by Burkart for that species.
It differs from var. regnellii in virgate habit, with few large leaves below mid-stem and an extremely long efoliate and multicapitulate pseudoraceme, branched or not, overtopping the foliage by 5-8 dm, and further by concolorous, symmetrically Unear-oblong leaffets with a centric costa either solitary or accompanied on each side by a narrowly intramarginal nerve.
In the asymmetrically costate leaffets of M. regnellii the midrib is accompanied on the posterior side alone by primary nerves and the margin of the leaffets is rimmed with pallid tissue.
The habit of M. regnellii, when all varieties are considered, is somewhat diverse, but the mature plants are usually distinctly fmticose, with defoliate trunks and densely leafy homotinous branches.
The varieties of M. regnellii sympatric or nearly so with M. deceptrix in eastem Parana differ further in short leaves and few pinnae.
303.
Mimosa chartostegia Bameby, sp. nov., M. micropteri affinis habituque comparabilis, sed bracteis fforalibus majusculis chartaceis 3-5.5 (nec 1-2) mm longis alabastra obtegentibus, capituUs ergo ante anthesin conoideis (nec moriformibus) necnon calyce longiori 2-2.7 (nec 1-1.6) mm longo diversa.—Brazil.
Parana: Alto da Serra Sao Luiz do Puruna, 2.
VII.1967 (ff), H. & M. Moreira 401.-Holotypus, US 2541842 = NY Neg. 11565.
Fig.
21.
Precociously ffowering shrubs attaining 2.5 m, the stiff, prominently 8-10-ribbed, intemally pithy stems and the lf-axes thinly, the inflorescence more densely strigose with appressed or narrowly ascending, basally dilated, mostly comma-shaped setae ±0.5-1 mm mixed with scattered minute puberulence, nowhere glandular, the thick-textured subconcolorous lfts glabrous lustrous, the plumply ovoid-globose capitula densely shortly pseudoracemose either from distal Ifaxils, when immersed in foliage, or terminal to branchlets, when shortly exserted.
Stipules firm lance-UguIate obtuse mucronate 4-9 x 1-1.5 mm, commonly 3-nerved beyond middle, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 3.5-7 cm, rounded dorsally, grooved ventrally and laterally, the petiole including obese livid pulvinus 6-15 X 0.7-1.4 mm, the interpinnal segments 3.5-8(-10) mm, the ventral groove bridged between pinnae but espiculate; pinnae 7-9-jug., accrescent distally, the rachis of longer ones (1.5-)2-3.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 25-33-jug., decrescent only at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.4-0.7 mm distant from small lanceolate paraphyllidia, all in outline narrowly oblong from angulate base, callous-mucronate at apex, the longer ones 2-4.5 x 0.5-1 mm, 3.5-4.5 times as long as wide, the midrib of all only a little displaced and subimmersed.
Axis of pseudoracemes, including peduncle, 2-5 cm, mostly (2-)'^-5-capitulate; peduncles solitary or geminate, at anthesis 5-10 mm; capitula prior to anthesis conelike 7.5-8.5 mm diam., the imbricate bracts concealing the densely silverystrigulose fl-buds but deciduous as these expand, the capitulum at anthesis becoming, without filaments, 8-9 mm diam.; bracts lanceolate 3-5.5 X 0.7-1.1 mm, downwardly attenuate and glabrous at base, the firm brownish-stramineous incurved blade pubemlent dorsally near middle, glabrate at tip, serrately setose-ciliolate, bluntly 1-nerved; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones small and either imperfect or sterile, the rest subequilong but only a few distal ones bisexual; calyx paleaceous 2-2.7 mm, 4-cleft nearly to base, the lobes deeply setose-decompound; well-developed corolla narrowly funnelform 2.6-3.3 mm, the cymbiform, intemally purplish, extemally densely antrorse-strigulose lobes 1-1.1 X 0.55-0.65 mm; filaments pink, aging whitish, free at base, exserted 5-6.5 mm; ovary strigulose; pod unknown.
In stony, sometimes moist campo near 850- 1100 m, known only from the Atlantic-Paraguai FIG. 21.
Mimosa chartostegia Bameby.
A. Part offloweringstem.
B. Segment of stem + stipules + enlarged trichome.
C. Pair of leaflets, dorsal view.
D. Capitulum prior to anthesis.
E. Bract + flower. (All from Oliveira 917.) divide in lat. 25°10'-30°S in e. Parana, Brazil in habit of growth, but is distinguished at a glance (Serrinha, e. of Ponta Grossa; Sa. do Caete in by the conelike capitula. mun. Rio Branco do Sul; Sa.
S. Luis do Puruna in e. mun. Palmeira).—Fl.
VII-VIII. 304.
Mimosa candelabrum Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Mimosa chartostegia resembles M. micropteris Boissier II, 7(5): 356.
1907.—".
.
. in paludibus pr. Caaguazu [Paraguay], mens: Mart.,
Hassler n. 8882 flor. et 8862a fmct."
—Syntypi, G!; isosyntypi, BM! K! NY! P (8882)\ S (8882)\ W (8882)\ M. candelabrum war.joergensenii Burkart, Darwiniana 7(4): 539.
1947.—"Paraguay: Estancia Primera [near Yhu], en esteros ... P. Joergensen 4821."—Holotypus, SI (not seen); isotypi.
A! C! S! M. candelabrum sensu Burkart, 1947, I.e. Stout unarmed, virgately erect subshrubs 1.5- 4 m tall, the simple striate terete stem to 1.5 cm diam. at base but tapering upward, densely foliate up to a simple pseudoraceme of subglobose capitula that rises 4-8 dm above the uppermost If, the whole plant except for facially glabrous lfts scabrous-strigose with appressed or distally ascending, dorsally compressed, basally spurred, coarse but tapering or flagellum-tipped, paUid setae to 1.5-3.5 mm, the foliage dull olivaceous concolorous, the lfts finely appressed-setose-ciliolate.
Stipules firm erect, narrowly lance-attenuate 5-12 X 0.4-1.2 mm, 3-nerved proximally, sometimes minutely puberulent extemally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks progressively shorter upward along the stem, the lower to 12(-18) cm, the uppermost ±3.5-5 cm, the tme petiole reduced or almost so to the hard pulvinus, the interpinnal segments 7-11 mm, the ventral sulcus obscure, interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae of lvs at and beyond mid-stem (4-)5-l 0-jug., of large lower lvs (described by Hassler) to 18-jug., subaccrescent distally, the rachis 3.5-8 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.8-1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (40-)45- 75(-80)-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair ±0.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia often concealed among setae, the blades linear-lanceolate, straight or subfalcate, at base deeply auriculate on posterior side, at apex abruptly acute or mucronulate, those near mid-rachis 4-5.5 x 0.7-1.2 mm, 4.5-6 times as long as wide, the slightly displaced midrib weakly prominulous on both faces, sometimes obscurely branched beyond mid-blade, l(-2) short posterior primary veins sometimes faintly perceptible.
Peduncles solitary or exceptionally geminate (6-) 10-25 mm, densely ascending-setose; capitula plumply ovoid-globose, without filaments 8- 10.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts narrowly elliptic-oblanceolate acute or acuminate, those at mid-capitulum 3.5-4.5 x 0.5-1 mm, all glabrous dorsally, the membranous margin setulose-cUiolate;y76>w^r5 4-merous 4-androus, all but a few lower ones bisexual; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 2.4-3.1 mm, the lobes deeply setose-decompound, sometimes almost to base; corollas narrowly funnelform 3.1-4.5 mm, the cymbiform lobes 0.9-1.1 x 0.6-0.7 mm, densely gray-pubemlent extemally; filaments pink, free almost to base, exserted 5-8 mm; anthers 0.5- 0.6 mm diam.; style as long as filaments.
Pods numerous in each capitulum, sessile or almost so, compressed but plump, in profile obliquely oblong-elUptic, slightly wider toward the broadly obtuse apex, when well fertilized 10-15 x 5-6.5 mm and 3-5-seeded, the replum ±0.5 mm wide, the firmly subcrustaceous valves coUiculate over each seed, when ripe separating basipetally from replum in one piece, charged intemally with vestigial membranous interseminal septa, the replum and valves alike densely strigose overall with contiguous coarse pallid setae; seeds ±4-4.5 x 3.5 mm, the testa dull dark brown or greenishbrown.
In marshy campo of the Paraguayan Plateau at ±350-500 m, local but forming colonies, known only from mun. Canendiyu, Yhu and Caaguazu in lat. 24°-25°30'S near 56°W.-n. IIIV.
This distinctive mimosa resembles in virgate habit and simple long-exserted pseudoraceme some of the coarser unijugate Brevipedes, but has the pluripinnate leaves of ser. Plurijugae.
It differs from M. myriophylla, which has rather similar leaves and inflorescence, most significantly in details of the larger capitula: longer bracts and flowers; filaments pink (not red); smaller anthers; 3-5 (not solitary) ovules; and a normally developed (not abbreviated claviform) style.
The more nearly related M. altoparanensis is readily distinguished by armament and leaf-formula.
The var. joergensenii does not amount to a taxonomically significant variant.
The isotypus at NY has peduncles to 2 cm long, and I can detect no real difference between it and other material of the species either in outline of the capitula or in the quality of setose pubescence.
305.
Mimosa altoparanensis Burkart, Darwiniana 7(4): 538.
1947, based on M. regnellii var. aculeata Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 553 (=P1. hassler.
409).
1904.- '[Paraguay:]... in uUginosis in campo Yeruti, Dec. [Hassler] n. 5745."-Holotypus, G!; i typus, BM! isoM. regnellii var. aculeata fma rectispina Chodat & Hassler, 1904, I.e.—"[Paraguay:] Pastoreo-mi a Test de la CordUlere de Villa-Rica, Sept. [Balansa] n. 1460."-Holotypus, G!; isotypus, P! M. altoparanensis sensu Bernardi, Boissiera 35: 144.
1984.
Tall virgate subshrubs attaining at least 2 m with densely foliate simple stem and long efoliate terminal pseudoraceme of globose capitula, in habit like related M. candelabrum but the ribbed stem erratically armed at or between nodes with erect, straight or curved, broad-based stramineous aculei to 5 mm, the lvs at once shorter and simpler, and the cauline setae sparser and shorter, to ± 1-1.5 mm and not basally spurred.
Leafstalks of lvs at and above mid-stem 1.5-4.5 cm (the lowest not seen, possibly longer), the petiole including hard, densely strigose pulvinus 2.5-3.5 mm, the interpinnal segments 3-6 mm, the ventral groove continuous; pinnae 4-7-jug., distally accrescent, the rachis of longer ones ±2-4.5 cm; lfts of longer pinnae ± 30-jug, otherwise as in M. candelabrum.
Pods several per capitulum, sessile, in profile elliptic or oblanceolate 10-12 x 3.5-4.5 mm, mostly 2-3-seeded, the not or only shallowly indented replum ±0.3 mm diam., the valves coarsely strigulose with dilated setulae to 0.7-1 mm, when ripe breaking up into free-falling articles, not inertly dehiscent as in M. candelabrum.
In swampy campo near 300-400 m, known from scattered stations on the Paraguayan Plateau in s. Paraguay (deptos Caaguazu, Caazapa and Alto Parana).-R. IX-III. As realized by Chodat and Hassler, M. altoparanensis is closely akin to the also Paraguayan M. candelabrum, but I agree with Burkart that it deserves independent specific status.
It differs from M. candelabrum not only in the armature, but in leaf-size and leaf-formula, in smaller capitula mostly fasciculate at each node of the pseudoraceme, in shorter corollas, and in the pod breaking up when ripe into independently falling articles.
306.
Mimosa myriophylla Bongard ex Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 384.
1841.-"BrazU, Sello, [Riedel commun.] Langsdorff."
"% the second expanded in Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 342.
1876 to: " .
.
. ad Pombal provinciae Minas Geraes (?): Riedel."
—Lectotypus, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Benth.)!; presumed isotypi, NY! P!,
W!; syntypi, Riedel 14/1037, some apparently renumbered 287, 312, A! K! NY! M. pluriracemosa Burkart, Darwiniana 7(4): 535.
1947.—"Argentina.
Misiones: Dep.
Ap6stoles, A. M. Ruiz Huidobro 4535, en flor, 9-II-1947."-Holotypus, LIL 185972, seen in photograph (NY), this with protologue, complemented by thefigurecited below, ample for interpretation.
M. myriophylla sensu Bentham, 1875: 406; Burkart, Darwiniana 7(4): 539.
1947; 1979: 252.
M. pluriracemosa sensu Burkart, 1948: 136, fig. 20.
Unarmed, amply microphyllidious shrubs attaining ± 12-20 dm, the stems and lf-axes minutely but often densely puberulent and thinly strigose with appressed, proximally scaberulous setae to 0.6-1.4 mm, the small crowded thicktextured, dull brown concolorous, facially glabrous or subglabrous lfts marginally ciliolate or weakly remotely setulose-ciliolate and granular, the axis of the subspiciform, simple or fewbranched multicipital inflorescence more densely strigose or hispid with subappressed or ascending-incurved, sometimes mfescent setae and exserted 2.5-5.5 dm from foliage, the ovoid-suborbicular capitula sessile or on peduncle scarcely as long as their long diameter.
Stipules firm erect linear-lanceolate 3.5-6 x 0.45-0.8 mm, inperceptibly nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 5-12 cm, the petiole including hard obese pulvinus ±10-15 mm, of some early lvs to 25 mm, at middle 0.7-1.4 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 3-9 mm, the ventral groove subobsolete, interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae (8-11)11-24-jug., subequilong or distally decrescent, the rachis of longer ones (23-)30-53 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.7(-0.8) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (38-)40-65-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.1-0.4 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.15-0.5 mm, the blades oblong-elUptic, straight or subfalcate, at apex obtuse or subobtuse apiculate, at base triangularauriculate postically, the larger ones (1.7-)2- 3.2(-3.6) X 0.7-1.1 mm, 2.9-3.5 times as long as wide, all veinless extemally except for faintly paler or discolored but not prominulous midrib, this perceptible only dorsally.
Inflorescence stifl*- ly virgate or 1-4-branched proximally, the branches when present much shorter than the MAP 45.
Southeastem Brazil and adjacent countries.
Range of M. myriophylla Bongard ex Bentham. central axis, narrowly ascending; capitula plumply ovoid or subglobose, without filaments 5-5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; fl-buds ovoid, bluntly 4-angulate, gray-puberulent; bracts heteromorphic, the lowest ovate-acuminate, the upper oblanceolate, all ±1.7-2.3 x 0.4-1 mm, dorsally pubemlent distally on either side of glabrous Isieel;flowers4-merous 4-androus, in some capitula all staminate, in others all but the lowest bisexual; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 1.3-2.2 mm, the lobes variably decompound into slender setae; corolla 1.9-2.7 mm, that of lowest flowers turbinate, of the rest vase-shaped, the ovatecymbiform, apicaUy thickened lobes 0.6-2 x 0.6- 0.8 mm; filaments dark red, free to base or nearly so, exserted 3.5-4.5 mm; anthers pallid, relatively very large, 0.7-0.9 mm diam.; style slenderly claviform glabrous 0.7-0.85 mm; ovary whitish-pilosulous; ovule one.
Pods numerous per capitulum, sessile in spherical capitula ± 8- 9 mm diam., each in profile obliquely elliptic obtuse cuspidulate 4—4.5 x 2.5 mm, 1-seeded, the replum ±0.4 mm wide, the stiffly papery valves separating when ripe both from the replum and from one another, the replum and valves aUke minutely puberulent and hispid overaU with straight ascending tawny setae to ± 1.5 mm; seeds (few seen) in profile narrowly obovate 2.1 x 1,4 mm, the testa fuscous dull.
In campo, attaining 1250 m in centr. Minas Gerais but lower s.-ward, apparently rare and scattered: Sa. do Espinha90 in centr. Minas Gerais (s.-w. of Diamantina); upland s.-w. Minas Gerais (P090S de Caldas; Camanducaia) and adj. S. Paulo; disjunct (by present evidence) in lowland deptos.
Paraguari and Misiones, Paraguay, in Misiones, Argentina, and adj. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil; reported (Malme, 1931: 11) fiirther from n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul (Vaccaria, Dutra 432) and from Sta. Catarina (Sello 4385) but unknown from the latter state by Burkart (1979).-R. I-IV(-?).
Map 45.
Mimosa myriophylla and M. callidryas (which see for commentary) together are diffeent from all other members of the genus in the relatively immense anthers that coincide with a short stout style enclosed in or scarcely emergent from the corolla.
Auguste de Saint-Hilaire first noted the short style in Febmary 1821 (Fieldbook C2, no. 2654, P) in plants encountered on rio Mbutui near San Borja on the Brazilian side of the Umguay river, and Burkart in the protologue of M. pluriracemosa (1947) and in description and figure of the same in his revision of Argentine Mimosa (1948) wondered about its normality.
It appears to be a constant feature of M. myriophylla and M. callidryas, the ffowers of which seem to be adapted to self-pollination.
Burkart cannot have known that the type of M. myriophylla is likewise brachystylous, for he compared M. pluriracemosa in the first place with M. candelabrum and in the second with M. regnellii, both dolichostylous and small-anthered, and quite distinct in other features also.
Mimosa pluriracemosa was thought by Burkart to differ from M. myriophylla in slightly fewer pairs of pinnae and sometimes larger leaffets, but these differences are poorly expressed in the material now available, and do not coincide with geographical dispersal.
There is also some variation in length of the peduncles, the capitula in highland Minas Gerais and S. Paulo being sessile, but in lowland habitats along the lower Parana and Umguai rivers often shortly stalked.
But stalked and almost sessile capitula are found among syntypes of M. myriophylla collected by Riedel (287.
312 respectively, NY).
The exact provenance of the two collections of M. myriophylla described by Bentham is unknown.
Sello's specimens have neither number nor locality ascribed to them, and could have been collected either in tropical or southem extratropical Brazil.
The Pombal of Riedel's label, which Bentham surmised to be in Minas Gerais, has not been identified, and no such place is mentioned in Urban's itineraries of Lund or Riedel.
I am grateful to Dr. M. Lavin for procuring photographs of part of the type of M. pluriracemosa at LIL.
307.
Mimosa callidryas Bameby, sp. nov., notulis plurimis sed imprimis staminum filamentis rubris antherisque majusculis cum stylo abbreviato ac ovulo solitario M. myriophyllae arctissime consanguinea, sed ab ea pube caulina hispida (nec appressa), foliolis cujusque majoris pinnae simul minus numerosis (±30-38-, nec 40-60-jugis usque) ac dorso 2- (nec l)-nerviis, calyceque minimo setulis minutis 0.2-0.6 mm longis ciliato (nec paleaco-pappiformi 1.3-2.2 mm longo) diversa.— Brazil.
Parana [or perhaps S. Paulo]: Capao Bonito, in campis ad marginem silvulae, 790 m, 19.
III.1915 (ff), P. Dusen 16841.-Holotypus, GH; isotypi, A (2 sheets), G, M, NY, S. Amply microphyllidious unarmed, virgately erect subshrubs at least 1 m tall, resembling closely related M. myriophylla in habit, the striate reddish stem, lf-stks and axis of far-exserted efoliate, paniculately branched infforescence at once finely gray-pubemlent, livid-granular, and hispid with spreading-ascending, basally dilated and microscopically scaberulous setae to 1-3 mm, the dull olivaceous concolorous lfts pubemlent beneath, glabrous above, not setose-ciliate, the infforescence of small, plumply ellipsoid, shortpedunculate capitula rising 4-6 dm above furthest cauline If.
Stipules firm, narrowly lanceattenuate 4-8 X 0.5-0.9 mm, pubemlent and hispidulous dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (4.5-)5.5-l 1 cm, the petiole including hard obese pulvinus 2-3.5 cm, near middle 0.5-0.7 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 4-10 mm, the ventral groove very narrow, interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae 7-10-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer pairs 20-38 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-0.9 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 30-38-jug., subequilong except at extreme ends of rachis, the small first pair 0.1-0.3 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.5 mm, the blades narrowly oblong obtuse or minutely mucronulate, at base shallowly semicordate, those near mid-rachis 3-4.5 x 0.85 x 1.2 mm, 3-4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath faintly 2-nerved, the midrib slightly excentric, the posterior nerve short and weak.
Primary axis of inflorescence 3-6.5 dm, that of 2- 4 lateral branches 1-3.5 dm, these strictly ascending, the peduncles 1.5-6 mm, geminate at almost all nodes; capitula without filaments 4- 5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds obovoid, densely gray-pubemlent; bracts narrowly spatulate 1.1-1.4 x 0.4 mm, finely puberulent dorsally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx tube 0.1-0.2 mm, the orifice fringed with weak setulae to 0.2-0.6 mm; corollas narrowly turbinate 2-2.1 mm, the ovatetriangular almost plane lobes pubemlent but only thinly so proximally; filaments dark red, free almost to base, exserted 2.5-3 mm; anthers 0.85- 0.9 mm diam.; ovary densely white-pilosulous; style glabrous 0.7-1.7 mm long, at apex 0.1 mm diam., either included or shortly exserted from corolla but very much shorter than the filaments; ovule one.
Pod in early stages of maturity compressed-obovate, densely white-setulose, not seen fully formed.
In campo at woodland margins near 790 m, known only from the type-locality either in e. Parana or possibly far s. S. Paulo.—FI.
II-III. Part of the type-collection of M. callidryas was identified by Harms as M. myriophylla, the species to which it is indeed closely related, being similar in growth-habit and sharing with it these unusual floral characters: dark red filaments bearing exceptionally large anthers; a short thick style much surpassed by the filaments; and a solitary ovule.
Differences that I consider of specific consequence are the greatly diminished (not large paleaceous-pappiform) calyx, fewer leaffets per pinna, and spreading hispid indumentum not yet encountered in M. myriophylla.
While the style of these two species is shorter than in any other mimosa of southeastem Brazil, that of M. callidryas is ordinarily shortly exserted from the corolla at anthesis, whereas that of M. myriophylla is fully included in it.
The epithet callidryas is derived from the name of the type-locality, Capao Bonito.
According to Dusen's labels this place is in Parana, but the Capao Bonito near 24°S in southem Sao Paulo is a possible alternative.
308.
Mimosa glazioui Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 397.
1875 & in Martius, R. bras. 15(2): 316. (^^glazioviV^), descr. ampliat.
1876.—"[Brazil]... in summis montibus Orgaos provinciae Rio de Janeiro: Glaziou n. 3723, 6191."-Lectotypus, Glaziou 6191 (ff), from "Haut des Orgaos, pres du Frade, 23.x. 1872 [data from field-label at P], K! = NY Neg. 1790; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1326\ C! K! M! P! = NY Neg. 11808; syntypi, no. 3723, collected 8.
VIII.1869 (vix ff), C! K! M! P! M. glaziovii sensu Glaziou, 1906: 178.
Erect microphyllidious shrubs of unknown stature with defoliate annotinous stem freely densely branched distally, armed throughout at variable distance from nodes with infrastipular and intemodal, straight or subdeclined, broadbased aculei 2-4 mm, the homotinous stems, lfstks and peduncles densely hispid with stiff", loosely ascending msty setae to 1.5-2.5 mm mixed with minute gray puberulence, the (dry) dark brown lfts glabrous facially, a little paler dorsally than ventrally, almost continuously appressed-setose-ciliolate, the narrowly pyramidal infforescence composed of one terminal and short lateral efoliate pseudoracemes shortly surpassing the subtending If, the plumply ellipsoid, very dense capitula gray-puberulent.
Stipules firm, stiffly erect-incurved, Unear-attenuate 3.5-10 x 0.6-1 mm, bluntly 1-nerved dorsally, deciduous with associated If.
Leaf-stalks 1.5-5 cm, the petiole including firm livid pulvinus 1-2.4 cm, at middle 0.5-1.1 mm diam., the shallow ventral groove bridged at insertion of pinnae but spicules 0, the longer or single interpinnal segments 5-14 mm; pinnae 2-3-jug. (of rare distal depauperate lvs 1-jug., no further described), subequilong, the rachis 2.5-5.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (0.8-) 1-3.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 16- 22-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 1-1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.6-1.5 mm, the blades narrowly lance-oblong from obtusangulate base, straight or obscurely arched forward, triangular-acuminate at apex, those near mid-rachis 5.5-9.5 x 1.7-3 mm, 3.2-5.5 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath weakly 3-4-nerved from pulvinule, the slender midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, faintly 1-2-branched distally, becoming pallid and prominulous near tip of blade, the posterior nerves short and faint.
Peduncles usually 2-3 per node, 6-16 mm; capitula without filaments 7- 10 X 6-8 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the obtusangulate ff-buds antrorsely gray-pubemlent; bracts lanceolate ±1-1.5 x 0.3-0.5 mm, subconduplicate, carinately 1-nerved dorsally; flowers teste Glaziou yellow, but filaments white (Rizzini 10000, RB) 4-merous 4-androus, some early ones staminate; calyx campanulate, thinly pubemlent extemally 0.75-1.3 mm, asymmetrically 4-dentate, the teeth deltate or triangular, the longest 0.2-0.4 mm; corollas narrowly funnel-shaped, the bisexual ones 2.8-3.5 mm, the narrowly ovate, dorsally keeled lobes 1-1.2 x 0.6-0.7 mm, at apex involute and subcucuUate, some staminate ffs a little smaller; filaments free to base, exserted 3 mm; anthers 0.5-0.6 mm diam.; ovary granular-pubemlent;/7c><i unknown.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be expected in open rocky places near 1200 and up to 1800 m, collected only on summits of Sa. dos Orgaos in state of Rio de Janeiro, BrazU.-B. VIII-IX(-?).
Bentham associated M. glazioui with the essentially herbaceous M. pudica and M. polydactyla, from which it differs in well-spaced pinnae, relatively well-developed calyx, and apparently tmly shmbby life-form, characters which together strongly suggest affinity to ser. Myriophyllae.
Yellow ffowers, as described by Glaziou, are known elsewhere in haplostemonous Mimosa only coincident with the stellate or arborescently branched setae of sect. Calothamnos; the color requires direct observation of fresh material.
Until the fmit is described, the relationship of M. glazioui will remain open to interpretation.
The "viscid-glandular" pubescence seen by Bentham between the tawny bristles of the stem appears to my eye to be simple pubemlence.
309.
Mimosa balduinii Burkart, Darwiniana 9: 391 (''Balduini''), fig. 2 (''Balduinii'').
1951.- ''Brasiliana australis, Rio Grande do Sul, Cambara, leg. Balduino Rambo S. J. No. 36.179, 6-II-1948 "-Holotypus, SI, not seen; isotypus, K! M. balduinii sensu Burkart, 1979: 239.
Amply microphyllidious, much branched shrubs said to resemble M. bimucronata in habit, attaining 4 m with spiny tmnk to 15 cm diam., armed at most nodes with a pair of ascending straight lustrous-brown, proximally subcompressed infrastipular aculei 3-9 mm, the terete, faintly striate young stems and lf-axes hispid with slender ascending msty setae 1-2.5 mm and in addition minutely pubemlent, the lvs olivaceous subconcolorous, the lfts either facially glabrous or dorsally thinly pubemlent, discontinuously appressed-setose-ciliate, the short, densely ffowered amentiform spikes of gray-strigulose ffs single and geminate in axil of coevally expanding lvs, early immersed in foliage.
Stipules herbaceous lance-attenuate to 5-6 x 1 mm, 1 -nerved, caducous.
Leaf-stalks (2.5-)3-6(6.5) cm; petiole including livid pulvinus 16-28 x 0.4-0.8 mm, the interpinnal segments 6-11 mm, the ventral groove obscure, spicules 0; pinnae (2-)3^(-5)- jug., subequilong, the rachis of distal pair 25-55 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments ± 1-2 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 16-24(-26)-jug., the first pair 0.6-1.1 mm distant from subulate herbaceous paraphyllidia 0.6-1.4 mm, the scarcely graduated blades lance-oblong or oblong-elUptic from shallowly semicordate base, abmptly apiculate, the longest ones 4-10(-ll) x 1.3-3 mm, ± 3 ^ times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric, simple or weakly 1-2-branched distally, the posterior nerve(s) short and weak, all immersed but discolored.
Peduncles 4-12 mm, densely rusty-hispid; flower-spikes without filaments ±6 mm diam., the axis 1-3 cm; bracts slenderly lanceolate 1.2-1.7 mm, dorsally glabrous 1-nerved, setose-ciliolate, persistent; flowers sessile 4-merous 4-androus, many staminate; calyx submembranous fuscous campanulate 1- 1.3 mm, glabrous extemally, the rim very shortly 4-denticulate, the adaxial tooth to 0.2 mm, the rest shorter; corolla narrowly funnelform 3-3.4 mm, densely antrorse-strigulose overall, the erect, almost plane ovate 1-nerved lobes ±0.9-1.1 x 0.8 mm; filaments pink, united at base into a stemonozone ±0.3 mm, exserted 6 mm; anthers 0.7 mm diam. Pods 1-6 per spike ascending sessile, turgidly oblong-ellipsoid or ellipsoid (7-) 10- 28 mm long, (1-)2-4-seeded, the stiffly papery, low-convex valves 5-6 mm wide but appearing twice as wide from a dense mantle of coarse, contiguous or even conffuent, incurved-ascending setae to 5-7 mm, when ripe falling entire from hispidly setose replum; seeds (teste Burkart) ± 6 X 4 mm.
In campo thickets at 1000-1100 m, very local on the heights of Sa.
Geral near 29°S in extreme n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul (Sa. da Pedra; Cambara do Sul), Brazil, to be expected in immediately adj. Sta. Catarina.—n. II-V, the fmits sometimes persistent on annotinous branchlets.
This eminently distinct temperate mimosa, instantly recognized in the context of ser. Myriophyllae by the effuse panicle of gray-silky ffowerspikes subtended by coevally expanding or lately expanded leaves, worthily commemorates its discoverer, Fr.
Balduino Rambo, S.J.,
nestor among botanists of Rio Grande do Sul. E(ii).
Series MIMOSA Mimosa Linnaeus sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa.
Mimosa Linnaeus, sens. str.—Typus supra sub generis titulo indicata.
M. sect. Eumimosa Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 388.
1875, max. ex parte, exclus. ser. Myriophyllis, Spicifloris, Lepidotis.
Mostly shrubs and subshrubs, few arborescent, few vining, few acaulescent or almost so, but some tmly herbaceous and few of these monocarpic, either microor macrophyUidious and either unarmed or armed a) at nodes or on intemodes, and sometimes also on lf-axes with either straight or antrorse or retrorse aculei or b) serially aculeate throughout.
Indumentum of fine pubemlence and of variably oriented, basally ± dilated or bulbous, distally tapering, mostly smooth but rarely scabemlous or plumose, in few spp. basally calcarate and obcompressed setae (but setae in monotypic Discobolae and Diffusae and in some Sparsae suppressed or almost so), rarely in addition of gland-tipped setulae, the Iftmargin almost without exception setose-ciliate with either spreading or forwardly appressed setae either appressed or basally retrodecmrent into the margin, then sometimes conffuent into a continuous marginal nerve, the corolla sometimes retrostrigulose.
Stipules either linear-subulate 1 -nerved, or firm and extemally nerveless, or less often dilated and multistriate.
Leaves of the majority conjugately pinnate, but the lfts then from 2 (in some spp. of subser. Mimosae 1.5) to 90(-95) pairs, their number and size usually reciprocally adjusted, in few subseries the pinnae l-4(-5, in some M. distans to 8, in subser. Widgrenianae 5-10) pairs, when more than I the pairs often crowded above middle or toward apex of lf-stk, occasionally more distant; ventral sulcus of lfstk either continuous or bridged between pinnapairs, then either spiculate or not; venation of lfts either immersed or palmate, in some ample lfts further reticulate, the primary veins either expiring or anastomosing short of margin or produced to it.
Flowers mostly capitate but in few spp. spicate, the units of inflorescence variable in relation to life-form ofthe plant, either solitary or fasciculate in contemporary If-axils, in pseudoracemes terminal to branchlets, in virgate simple pseudoracemes, rarely arising from brachyblasts on old wood or solitary on scapiform peduncle; bracts either shorter or (seldom) longer than ff-buds, these often 4-keeled and 4-sulcate; ffs 4-merous; calyx varying from membranous campanulate and tmncate or shortly denticulate to paleaceous-pappiform or subobsolete, occasionally asymmetrical (spathiform, the adaxial lobe longer); corolla-lobes either membranous plane or variably cymbiform and comeously thickened; filaments either free or connate around ovary; ovules mostly 2-5(-6), in M. sprengelii to 8.
Fruit usually a craspedium with hispid or aculeate, relatively narrow replum, valvately dehiscent from apex downward in subser. Dolentes, the replum dilated and the valves continuous in M. glabra.
Spp. 159, neotropical except for a few extending into warm-temperate Argentina and Umguay, elaborately diversified in Brazil s. of Amazonia and adj. Bolivia, Argentina, and Paraguay, a few Andean and a few of llano and campestral habitats in Venezuela and Colombia, 1 in lowland Pacific Ecuador, 7 common to N. and S. America and of these, two (M. polydactyla, M. pudica) weedy in paleotropics (the second circumtropical), 11 endemic to tropical Mexico, and 1 (M. viva) to Cuba and Jamaica.
The series Mimosa is here vastly expanded to encompass Bentham's ser. Sensitivae, Castae, Pectinatae, Pudicae, Hirsutae, Pedunculosae, Meticulosae and Obstrigosae, though most of these survive, either in original or altered form, and some under different name, at a lower taxonomic level.
In 1875 Bentham possessed 95 species distributed among these eight series, which, deliberately passing over particular exceptions, he characterized as follows: Sensitivae: lf-formula i/2, the lfts ample; aculei either scattered or 0.
Castae: lf-formula i/several; aculei scattered.
Pectinatae: lf-formula i/several-many; aculei some or all infrastipular.
Pudicae: as the last, but lf-formula ii-v/many.
Hirsutae: lf-formula (i-)ii-iv/many; aculei of the two last; lfts marginate.
Pedunculosae: lf-formula i(-ii-iv)/5-many; aculei 0; lfts marginate; stems diffuse and peduncles mostly axillary and elongate.
Meticulosae: lf-formula i/4-many; aculei 0; lfts marginate; stems erect-ascending and peduncles mostly short and racemose or paniculate.
Obstrigosae: If-formvda i/several; aculei either few or 0; indumentum ofretrorsely appressed setae orO.
Practical, though not of necessity theoretical deficiencies of this classification are four: a) it takes account of relatively few available characters, namely leaf-formula, type of armament, marginal nerve of leaffets, and to a limited degree growth-habit and organization of the infforescence, or (Obstrigosae) orientation of setae; no use is found for the calyx, wonderfully diverse through the group, of connation of filaments, or retrostrigulose versus puberulent or glabrous corolla-lobes, of spiculate leaf-stalks, or of the fruits, though some of these are noticed in the intraserial ordination of ser. Meticulosae; b) characters found significant in one context are dismissed as insignificant in an immediately related group; c) each character-state singled out as a criterion for the series contrives to separate into different series at least one pair of species in other respects similar and certainly nearly akin, or alternatively convenes into a given series a pair of species otherwise different; d) prognostic value has tumed out to be low, a significant proportion of species discovered since 1875, amounting to an increase in the neighborhood of 70%, cannot be fitted easily, if at all, into the categoric framework.
Bentham was, of course, aware that his sectional definitions were not mutually exclusive, and recorded (1875: 401) his struggle to arrange the Meticulosae, in particular, into a rational, or natural order.
In modem times Burkart has followed Bentham as best may be, but encountered vexing problems in classification of some marked new species, such as M. cainguensis, M. balduinii or M. pseudocallosa, on the cusp, respectively, between Pedunculosae and Hirsutae, Pudicae and Myriophyllae, and Obstrigosae and Pedunculosae.
As described in these pages M. (Pudicae) pudica and M. (Hirsutae) hirsutissima each occurs in armed and unarmed forms, and the armed form of the first and both armed and unarmed ones of the latter may have either one or to three or four pairs of pinnae per leaf.
The polymorphic M. xanthocentra likewise occurs in armed and unarmed forms, of which the former was placed by Bentham (as M. polycarpa) in ser. Pectinatae but the latter in ser. Meticulosae, and the armed form differs essentially from M. (Pudicae) verecunda in number of pinnae alone.
The group of planaltine Mimosae here assembled, on the basis of a strong fforal syndrome of paleaceous calyx and monadelphous stamens coinciding with endemic dispersal in the cerrado vegetational province, as subser. Polycephalae, are uniformly unarmed and have constantly conjugate-pinnate leaves; but sorted by habit and infforescence they would be dispersed between Bentham's series Meticulosae and Hirsutae.
Furthermore, we now have two species with ffowers of Polycephalae but one anomalous feature, the armed M. dicerastes, which might find an uneasy niche in ser. Pudicae Bentham, and unarmed M. discobola which has 2-4 pairs of pinnae and a paniculate infforescence and finds no ready-made category in sect. Mimosa.
Again, evaluated in terms of overall similarity, M. (Castae) dolens, which has armed stems but valvately dehiscent fmits, callous-marginate leaffets, and the rare feature of a determinate pseudoraceme, is most unnaturally divorced, simply on account of armament, from otherwise essentially similar Mm. (Meticulosae) acerba and conferta.
While it is easy to find fault with Bentham's classification of Eumimosa, a coherent and credible substitute is at present unattainable.
The problems that Bentham faced in 1875 have proliferated with the discovery of new species and with fuller knowledge of the old.
Prolonged reffection on this intractable theme persuades me that these haplostemonous mimosas form a complexly interrelated circle, or more properly sphere, of affinities which cannot be neatly resolved into few discrete, monophyletic parts.
Some of the traits that seem certainly to indicate affinity between, say, a and b, become in the context of c and d capriciously labile and inconsequential; while on other evidence it would appear that a has more in common with d than it has either with b or c. Such enigmas appear repeatedly in the series.
Persuasive evidence of bathyrhythmic evolution has accumulated.
In one circle of affinity the leaf-formula becomes stabilized while the calyx or the fmit or the armament continue to be modified; elsewhere it is the fmit or the calyx that are StabiUzed while stipules, leaf-formula and indumentum ffuctuate within wide limits.
The possible combinations of character-states rise exponentially with the number of characters taken into account; and the distinction between an overall similarity due to common ancestry and a fortuitously convergent resemblance is a riddle.
An example of the latter is the simplified leafformula of i/2 which characterized ser. Sensitivae Bentham and was known to him only in this series.
We have since acquired, however, two Mexican species which have the leaf pattem of Sensitivae but nevertheless have what I take to be clear affinity to species with plurifoliolate pinnae: M. tequilana, a monocarpic species that exactly mimics the sympatric M. affinis in a reduced infforescence otherwise foreign to ser. Sensitivae; and the fmtescent M. acapulcensis. except for the simplified pinnae reminiscent rather of M. (Lactifluae) caerulea.
In the following account of an extended ser. Mimosa I have assembled into subsidiary groups only those species that are perceived, through multiple similarities and correlated ecology and dispersal, to be unquestionably close kindred.
Each of these is assumed to be monophyletic, but all seem interconnected by a web of crossrelationships which I have not been able to resolve into any logical sequence or simplify into larger independent units.
Then, too, there remain about a dozen species of which no obviously close relative has been identified.
In the context of the genus the discontinuities between subsidiary groups are narrow, narrower that is than those between series of sects.
Batocaulon and Habbasia, and they are therefore accorded the lesser rank of subseries.
Conspectus of series Mimosa, showing the subseries, the number of species, and dispersal H spicules prevalent (but not universal); stems aculeate. subser. Polycarpae Bameby: 4 spp., Andean Pern-Argentina and S. Amer. s. of Amazonia.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5. subser. Pectinatae (Bentham) Bameby: 2 spp., Andean n. Peru, subser. Castae (Bentham) Bameby: 4 spp., Centr.
Amer., trop.
S. Amer., W.I. subser. Teledactylae Bameby: 1 sp., s. trop.
Mexico and Centr.
Amer. subser. Mimosa: 9 spp., trop.
Mexico to n. warm-temp.
S. Amer. Spicules present; stems unarmed.
6. subser. Pedunculosae (Bentham) Bameby: 10 spp., Parana-Paraguai basin, 1 s.-e. to Atlantic s. Brazil.
H Spicules 0; stems aculeate.
7. subser. Lactifluae Bameby: 10 spp., trop.
Mexico and Centr.
Amer., 1 in Andean Peru.
8. subser. Bolivianae Bameby: 1 sp., Andean Peru and Bolivia.
9. subser. Dolentes Bameby: 1 sp. (multiracial), Brazilian Planalto, Parana-Paraguai basin, and s. Atlantic Brazil and Uruguay.
10. subser. Lundianae Bameby: 2 spp., s.-e. trop.
Brazil.
11. subser. Trichocephalae Bameby: 3 spp., trop. e. Brazil.
12. subser. Ramosissimae Bameby: 4 spp., s.-e. trop. and extratrop.
Brazil.
13. subser. Serrae Bameby: 1 sp., upland extratrop.
Brazil.
14. subser. Sparsae Bameby: 7 spp., s.-e. trop. and extratrop.
Brazil, (?) Umguay.
15. subser. Obstrigosae (Bentham) Bameby: 8 spp., lower Parana-Paraguai basin, s. in Argentina to Buenos Aires, and through extratrop.
Brazil to Umguay.
16. subser. Pudicae (Bentham) Bameby: 6 spp., s. Mexico to Argentina, one pantrop.
17. subser. Morongianae Bameby: 2 spp., e. Paraguay.
18. subser. Bipennatulae Bameby: 2 spp., s.-w. trop.
Brazil and e. Bolivia.
19. subser. Aflines Bameby: 3 spp., trop.
Mexico and Centr.
Amer., one in Pacific Ecuador.
20. subser. Simplicissimae Bameby: 1 sp., e. Colombia (llanos).
Spicules 0; mostly unarmed; calyx paleaceous and filaments strongly monadelphous.
21. subser. Polycephalae (Bentham) Bameby: 19 spp., Brazilian Planalto (cerrado province).
22. subser. Dicerasteae Bameby: 1 sp., e.-centr. upland Goias, Brazil.
23. subser. Discobolae Bameby: 1 sp., s.-e. Goias and adj. Mato Grosso, Brazil.
24. subser. Hirsutae (Bentham) Bameby: 10 spp., all present on Brazilian Planalto or in middle ParanaParaguai basin in Paraguay and adj. Argentina, one n. to n.-e. Brazil, the Guayana Highland, and n. Centr.
Amer. Spicules 0; unarmed (1 exception); calyx variable but if paleaceous the filaments free.
25. subser. Brevipedes Bameby: 9 spp., middle Parana basin in Brazil, Paraguay, and adj. Argentina.
26. subser. Thomistae Bameby: 1 sp., montane s. Minas Gerais, Brazil.
27. subser. Pogocephalae Bameby: 8 spp., upland centr. and s. Minas Gerais and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
28. subser. Microcarpae Bameby: 8 spp., upland s. Brazil s.-ward from centr. Minas Gerais.
29. subser. Lanatae Bameby: 1 sp., upland extratrop.
Brazil.
CoroUa retrostrigulose; unarmed; spicules 0.
30. subser. Macrocalycinae Bameby: 2 spp., middle Parana basin in Paraguay, adj. Brazil, and n.-e. Argentina.
31. subser. Reptantes Bameby: 8 spp., planaUine and extratrop.
Brazil, e. Paraguay, n.-e. Argentina, and Uruguay.
32. subser. Ramentaceae Bameby: 1 sp., cloud forest in e. Sta. Catarina, Brazil.
33. subser. Axillares Bameby: 4 spp., extratrop.
Brazil and adj. Argentina.
34. subser. Dryandroideae Bameby: 2 spp., upland sub-Atlantic Brazil from Rio de Janeiro to Sta. Catarina.
35. subser. Dutranae Bameby: 1 sp., far s. Brazil and (?) Uruguay.
36. subser. Widgrenianae Bameby: 1 sp., upland s. Minas Gerais, Brazil.
HHHIfTO Spicules and aculei 0; lfts sigmoid; calyx minute; corolla glabrous.
37. subser. Diffusae Bameby: 1 sp., far s. Brazil (Rio Grande do Sul).
Key to subseries and some species of ser. Mimosa 1.
Plants of continental North America n.-ward from Panama Canal Subordinate key I (p. 510).
1.
Plants of West Indies, e. Panama, and South America.
2.
Pinnae of every If exactly 1 pair.
3.
Stems aculeate Subordinate key II (p. 510).
3.
Stems unarmed Subordinate key III (p. 513).
2.
Pinnae of some or of all lvs more than 1 pair.
4.
Stems aculeate Subordinate key IV (p. 515).
4.
Stems unarmed Subordinate key V (p. 515).
Series Mimosa, subordinate key I: continental North America 1.
Pinnae 3-5-jug., and the pairs separated along lf-stk by intervals of 1-2 cm.
321.
M. teledactyla (p. 533).
1.
Pinnae either less than 3-jug., or if as many as in the last then crowded toward tip of lf-stk at intervals of less than 2.5 mm.
2.
Lfts of distal (or only) pair of pinnae 3 pairs or more.
3.
Stiffly branched shrubs with woody annotinous branches, if armed, then with no more than 1- 3 aculei at each node or on each intemode E(ii.7). subser. Lactifluae (p. 571).
3.
Either herbs (monocarpic, precociously flowering perennial, or weakly suffrutescent at maturity) or prickly vines.
4.
Calyx paleaceous, 1 mm long or longer 415.
M. hirsutissima (p. 692).
4.
Calyx minute, less than 1 mm.
5.
Pinnae of larger lvs 2-5 pairs E(ii. 16). subser. Pudicae (p. 622).
5.
Pinnae of all lvs exactly 1 pair.
6.
Prickly vines with serially aculeate stems and lf-stks E(ii.3). subser. Castae (p. 524).
6.
Herbs, some frutescent in age, the stems aculeolate at or just below nodes.
7.
Rs of each capitulum 25 or less, all ascending from receptacle E(ii. 19). subser. Aflines (p. 649).
7.
Rs of each capitulum many more than 25, ascending and spreading from the receptacle of densely packed, ovoid-ellipsoid capitula; conjugate-pinnate forms of: 379.
M. pudica (p. 624).
2.
Lfts of the single pair of pinnae exactly 4, or by loss of anterior 1ft of proximal pair exactly 3 (lfts either 6 or 8 per If).
8.
Capitula 12-25-fld, the fls all ascending from receptacle, the capitulum without filaments 2 .
5 ^ mm diam.; low diffuse monocarpic herbs 2-A dm of s.-w. Mexico (Nueva Galicia) 391.
M. tequilana (p. 651).
8.
Capitula more than 25-fld, without filaments at least 4.5 mm diam., and the fls at mid-capitulum subhorizontal to receptacle; perennial or fmticose, only exceptionally less than 5 dm.
9.
Peduncles arising from scaley brachyblasts along annotinous branchlets; local in s. Mexico (Puebla, Oaxaca) 347.
M. goldmanii (p. 574).
9.
Peduncles arising either directly from the axil of a contemporary If or disposed in pseudoracemes terminal to homotinous branches; widespread E(ii.5). subser. Mimosa (p. 533).
Series Mimosa, subordinate key II: West Indies and S. America; stems armed; pinnae conjugate 1.
Leaflets of each pinna exactly 4, the anterior member of the first pair often much smaller than the rest, or obsolete, each If then 6-foliolate E(ii.5). subser. Mimosa (p. 533).
1.
Leaflets of each pinna 6 or more.
2.
Peduncles and commonly the stems also retrostrigose with straight, appressed, dorsally compressed and basally calcarate setae; e. Brazil, largely extratropical but extending n. to centr. Minas Gerais, s. and e. into Umguay and Argentina E(ii. 15). subser. Obstrigosae (p. 612).
2.
Peduncles and stems commonly antrorsely strigose, or spreading-pilose, if retrostrigose the setae slender, terete, basifixed.
3.
Indumentum of stems composed in part of gland-tipped setulae.
4.
Aculei straight; inflorescence determinate, the distal capitulum of the pseudoraceme maturing before those immediately below it and often larger than them; pods gathered into a dense hard ball, each valvately dehiscent from apex downward, the valves themselves not articulate; subsp. dolens of: 352.
M. dolens (p. 582).
4.
Aculei recurved; inflorescence indeterminately pseudoracemose, the capitula maturing in acropetal sequence; pods loosely umbellate craspedia 353.
M. lundiana (p. 592).
3.
Indumentum of stems eglandular, sometimes almost 0.
5.
Stiff microphyllous shmbs of arid thom-scrub in valleys of the n. Peruvian Andes, the pinnarachis of longer lvs only 6-15 mm E(ii.2). subser. Pectinatae (p. 522).
5.
Various in habit and dispersal, but if of Andean dispersal the pinna-rachis of larger lvs 2.5- 14 cm.
6.
Stems virgate, densely clothed in small sessile, forwardly imbricate lvs; aculei very small, solitary and exactly infrapetiolar at each node of stem; e. Parana, Brazil 451.
M hilariana (p. 736).
6.
Stems various and foliage otherwise; if some aculei infrapetiolar at the nodes, then these usually accompanied by others either infrastipular or intemodal.
7.
Calyx 1 mm long or longer, paleaceous or pappiform, consisting of a short tube and either 4 homomorphic decompound lobes or a complete ring of setae.
8.
Setae of stems plumose; s. Peru and Bolivia, at ± 1000-2500 m 351.
M. boliviana (p. 578).
8.
Setae of stems smooth, microscopically scaberulous, or none.
9.
Stems and lf-stks serially aculeate with recurved prickles; rank vine-like subshrubs of lowland forest habitats E(ii.3). subser. Castae (p. 524).
9.
Stems armed at or below each node with 1-3, rarely more numerous aculei and lf-stks usually unarmed, rarely randomly so; plants of savanna and cerrado habitats.
10.
Lfts to 2-7 mm wide and 5-7-nerved from pulvinule; armed 1-jugate forms of: 415.
M. hirsutissima (p. 692).
10.
Lfts 0.8-2 mm wide, 1-3-nerved from pulvinule.
11.
Subshrubs, often functionally herbaceous, with capitula in a succession of If-axils along homotinous stems, not pseudoracemose at branch-tips; calyx-lobes decompound more than half their length, pappiform; filaments free to base or almost so; widespread; armed forms of: 384.
M. xanthocentra (p. 635).
11.
Arborescent shrubs, with capitula crowded near end of branchlets; calyx paleaceous 4-lobed; filaments connate around ovary; local on Chapada dos Veadeiros, Goias, Brazil 413.
M. dicerastes (p. 687).
7.
Calyx various, either a) as long as preceding but simply campanulate, or b) asymmetrically paleaceous (the lobe opposed to the bract alone developed, the rest abortive), or c) much less than 1 mm, often rudimentary or obsolete, the rim glabrous or only weakly minutely ciliolate.
12.
Corolla retrostrigulose; very local in s.-e. Sta. Catarina, Brazil 361.
M chaetosphaera (p. 602).
12.
Corolla either antrorsely strigulose or glabrous.
13.
Some retrorsely appressed, terete and basifixed setae on peduncles directly below the capitulum; s.-e. Brazil E(U.14). subser. Sparsae (p. 604).
13.
No retrorsely appressed setae on peduncles (some downswept ones in M. insidiosa).
14.
Loosely tufted or difftise herbs and functionally herbaceous subshrubs 2- 4(-6) dm, the whole stem with part of caudex or root commonly represented in herbarium specimens.
15.
Lf-stks 2-5 cm, espiculate; dwarf or juvenile forms of cosmopolitan: 379.
M. pudica (p. 624).
15.
Lf-stks less than 1.5 cm, usually spiculate at apex; Paraguay and n.-e. Argentina.
16.
Midrib on dorsal face of lfts continuously prominulous from base of blade to apex; aculeolate forms of: 332.
M. brevipetiolata (p. 562).
16.
Midrib on dorsal face of lfts prominulous only at base and at apex of blade, immersed at mid-blade. .312.
M. balansae (p. 520).
14.
Taller herbs, shrubs and vines (6-)8-14 dm, represented in herbaria usually by branches only.
17.
All lf-stks less than 1 cm.
18.
Plants of dry inter-Andean valleys of n. Peru.
19.
Stipules less than 1 mm wide, 1-nerved; fls puberulent. .. 350.
M. incarum (p. 576).
19.
Stipules at least 1 mm wide, several-nerved; fls glabrous; var. polycarpa of: 310.
M. polycarpa (p. 517).
18.
Plants of campo and river banks in s.-e. Brazil (s. Minas Gerais to Rio Grande do Sul).
20.
Stems hispid or hispidulous; replum of pod less than 1 mm wide, hispid; dehiscence of pod craspedial E(ii.l2). subser. Ramosissimae (p. 597).
20.
Stems glabrous; replum of pod ± 2 mm wide, glabrous; valves of pod dehiscent in one piece 368.
M. glabra (p. 610).
17.
Lf-stks of larger lvs 1-10 cm.
21.
Stems coarsely obstrigose-setose with downswept setae as well as aculeate; s. Minas Gerais and e. S. Paulo; var. insidiosa of: 354.
M. insidiosa (p. 592).
21.
Stems either hispid, puberulent or glabrous between the aculei, the setae when present subhorizontal or ascending.
22.
Each node or each intemode armed with (1-)2-3 aculei, the lf-stks almost always unarmed, the pinna-rachises always so.
23.
Stems glabrous between aculei; s.-e. Brazil and Uruguay.
24.
Plants of Sa. dos Orgaos in Rio de Janeiro; armed state of: 441.
M. ernestii (p. 727).
24.
Plants of Sa. da Mantiqueira in Rio de Janeiro and s.-ward to Uruguay E(ii. 14). subser. Sparsae (p. 604).
23.
Stems hispid, puberulent, strigose or setose as well as aculeate; widespread.
25.
Tall monocarpic herbs with one simple virgate stem densely hispid with horizontal yellowish setae to 2-3.5 mm; stipules caducous; peduncles solitary, less than 1 cm; fls glabrous; pods many, crescentically incurved on one another into spherical cluster; savannas of Int. del Meta, Colombia 393.
M. simplicissima (p. 653).
25.
Diffuse or, if erect, branched, usually suffrutescent plants, and if the stems long-hispid the stipules persistent; peduncles 2 or more in most If-axils, or some of them more than 1 cm, or both; pods either few or many per capitulum, straight or almost so.
26.
Lfts mostly 2-3-nerved dorsally and the midrib simple, the posterior nerve short and weak; lf-stks spiculate at apex E(ii.l). subser. Polycarpae (p. 516).
26.
Lfts 4-6-nerved dorsally and the midrib 3-5- branched on each side, the inner posterior nerve produced beyond mid-blade; spicules 0.
27.
Distributed in campo habitats at 350-1000 m from s.-e. Para to s. Minas Gerais and adj. S. Paulo; capitula globose ... E(ii.l 1). subser. Trichocephalae (p. 594).
27.
Distributed in lowland weedy habitats w. and n. of or exceptionally within the Amazonian Hylaea but rare in S. America; capitula ellipsoid; var. unijuga of: 379.
M. pudica (p. 624).
22.
Intemodes of stem, lf-stks, and most pinna-rachises armed with serial aculei.
28.
Stipules striately 12-25-nerved; stems sharply 2-3-angulate; inflorescence a terminal efoliate pseudoraceme; upland extratropical habitats in Parana and Sta. Catarina, BrazU 362.
M. serra (p. 603) 28.
Stipules 1-3-nerved; stems terete or bluntly low-ribbed; inflorescence of axillary capitula; either of tropical lowland habitats or at ±800-2000 m on e. slope of the Andes of s. Pem and Bolivia E(ii.3). subser. Castae (p. 524).
Series Mimosa, subordinate key III: West Indies and S. America; stems unarmed; pinnae conjugate 1.
Stems and peduncles retrorsely strigose with closely appressed, dorsiventrally compressed, basally calcarate setae; s.-e. Brazil s.-ward from centr. Minas Gerais to Uruguay and e. Argentina E(ii. 15). subser. Obstrigosae (p. 612).
1.
Stems and peduncles variously strigose, hispid, or glabrous, but if charged with retrorse setae these terete and basifixed.
2.
Inflorescence indeterminate, the capitula maturing in normal acropetal sequence along the axis of the pseudoraceme or branchlet; pods either valvate or craspedial in dehiscence, but when valvate not forming dense, globose clusters.
3.
Corolla retrostrigulose, usually overall, rarely only at middle; central Brazilian Planalto s.-ward, w. just into Paraguay.
4.
Virgate subshrubs 1.5-2 m tall of the Brazil-Paraguay border country, with erect simple stems densely foliate in lower half and thence passing into an efoliate pseudoraceme; lfts 3-nerved, the centric midrib flanked on each side by a nerve produced to blade apex 427.
M. fernandez-casasii (p. 710).
4.
Either habit or dispersal otherwise, usually both; Ift-venation otherwise.
5.
Lfts conspicuously bicolored, above convex and lustrous dark brownish-green, beneath concave and pallid-felted .E(ii.34). subser. Dryandroideae (p. 758).
5.
Lfts sometimes bicolored, but even if paler, not felted, beneath, commonly plane.
6.
Lfts obliquely lanceolate or semi-ovate, broadest near base, and coarsely costate dorsally, the strongly displaced or submarginal midrib dividing blade 1:2.5-5 E(ii.31). subser. Reptantes (p. 741).
6.
Lfts linear or narrowly to broadly oblong-eUiptic, little or not narrowed above asymmetric base, broadest near middle; midrib commonly weak, never so much displaced.
7.
Setae of stem, lf-stks and peduncles obcompressed, basally spurred; fls spicate.
.
470.
M. dutrae (p. 761).
7.
Setae terete, basifixed.
8.
Lfts of longer pinnae 6-23-jug., straight, not curved forward beyond mid-blade.
E(ii.31). subser. Reptantes (p. 741).
8.
Lfts of longer pinnae 30-55-jug., shallowly sigmoid (tilde-shaped) or curved forward beyond mid-blade.
9.
Erect shrublet of cloud forest near 1500 m in e. Sta. Catarina; inflorescence shortly pseudoracemose-paniculate at end of homotinous branchlets 463.
M. ramentacea (p. 753).
9.
Diffuse shrubs of lower elevations in extratropical Brazil, Uruguay, and adj. Argentina; inflorescence of spikes or capitula bome in a succession of If-axils.
E(ii.33). subser. Axillares (p. 754).
3.
Corolla antrorsely strigulose, puberulent, papillate, or glabrous.
10.
Calyx paleaceous, and filaments monadelphous through (0.8-)l-3 mm around the ovary; a large subser. endemic to the Brazilian Planalto E(ii.21). subser. Polycephalae (p. 654).
10.
Calyx either paleaceous, or pappiform, or campanulate truncate, or subobsolete, but if paleaceous-pappiform the filaments free to base or only obscurely shortly monadelphous below the ovary.
11.
Capitula in virgate efoliate terminal pseudoracemes projected far above foliage; wandlike campestral shrubs.
12.
Calyx minute or obsolete; lfts palmately nerved but not elaborately reticulate; Parana-Paraguai basin.
13.
Lf-stks espiculate E(ii.25). subser. Brevipedes (p. 705).
13.
Lf-stks spiculate at apex 337.
M. oligophylla (p. 567).
12.
Calyx pappiform; lfts coriaceous and elaborately venulose; montane s. Minas Gerais.
434.
M. thomista (p. 717).
11.
Capitula axUlary to coeval or early hysteranthous lvs, if shortly pseudoracemose in early anthesis the calyx pappiform.
14.
Lvs crowded along homotinous stems bome aloft on defoliate slender trunk or branches, at once sessile or almost so and forwardly imbricate; lfts of longer pinnae 8^0-jug. and less than 9 x 2 mm; upland wet campo and campo rupestre of s.-e. Brazil (centr. Minas Gerais to Sta. Catarina). .. E(ii.28). subser. Microcarpae (p. 728).
14.
Either lvs scattered along stems, or some obviously petiolate, and the lfts commonly larger (always so in the range of the preceding).
15.
Cauline setae downswept; var. major of: 354.
M. insidiosa (p. 592).
15.
Cauline setae patent, or ascending, or 0.
16.
Plants of crest and upper slopes of Sa. do Espinha?© in centr. and n.-centr. Minas Gerais and one on Sa. dos Orgaos in Rio de Janeiro, at elevations between 900 and 2000 m; calyx at most 0.6 mm, sometimes obsolete; pods (except M. setistipula) valvate in dehiscence E(ii.27). subser. Pogocephalae (p. 718).
16.
Plants distantly allopatric from the preceding; calyx various; dehiscence of pods always craspedial.
17.
Paraphyllidia of each pinna suborbicular, 3-5-nerved; upland n.-e. Sta. Catarina 369.
M. pseudocallosa (p. 612).
17.
Paraphyllidia linear or subulate, 1-nerved or nerveless.
18.
Calyx less than half as long as corolla or subobsolete, the tube not more than 0.5 mm, the rim glabrous or ciliolate, the cilia if present distinct to base.
19.
Monocarpic herbs of lowland Pacific Ecuador; fls of each capitulum few and all ascending from receptacle 390.
M. disperma (p. 650).
19.
Perennial herbs and shrubs, none extending w. of the Andes; fls at and below mid-capitulum subhorizontal to receptacle.
20.
Plants of savannas in w. Guyana; var. pastoris of: .
.
.
.
379.
M. pudica (p. 624).
20.
Plants of Paraguay, s. Brazil, Uruguay, and n.-e. Argentina.
21.
Lf-stks espiculate; lfts bent forward toward apex; rare sp. of Rio Grande do Sul E(ii.37). subser. Diffusae (p. 762).
21.
Lf-stks spiculate; lfts symmetrical at apex; allopatric E(ii.6). subser. Pedunculosae (p. 559).
18.
Calyx paleaceous or paleaceous-pappiform, half as long as corolla or longer.
22.
Plants softly pubescent throughout with extremely fine flagelliform setae, those of stem and peduncles retrorse basally but with spreading tip; young lvs and capitula before anthesis densely softly orange-brown-lanate; s. S. Paulo to s.-w. Sta. Catarina 452.
M. lanata (p. 738).
22.
Plants variably silky, or strigose, or glabrescent, but the cauline setae either erect or antrorse; indumentum of young lvs and capitula neither lanate nor orange-brown.
23.
Lfts shallowly sigmoid (tilde-shaped) in outline, the tip tilted forward; Paraguay, n.-e. Argentina, and s. Brazil E(ii.30). subser. Macrocalycinae (p. 738).
23.
Lfts straight.
24.
Stipules 1 -nerved; procumbent shrublets of Serrania de Santiago in Sta. Cruz, Bolivia; longer pinnae less than 3 cm and largest lfts only 0.3-0.6 mm wide.
388.
M. jacobita (p. 648).
24.
Stipules 3-7-nerved; allopatric; pinnae commonly more than 3 cm, or lfts wider than 0.6 mm, or both.
25.
Spindly shrubs of sandstone escarpment on Chapada dos Guimaraes in s. Mato Grosso; lfts of longer pinnae 70-85-jug., crowded along a rachis 3-4 cm long at intervals of ±0.3 mm. the largest only 0.3-0.4 mm wide; capitula ±3 mm diam 387.
M. bipennatula (p. 647).
25.
Shmbs and subshrubs of extremely wide dispersal and polymorphic in habit, but if lfts as many as in the preceding then less crowded along a much longer pinna-rachis and the larger ones well over 0.5 mm wide; capitula only exceptionally less than 4 mm diam., the lf-formula then different from that of above; subsp. subsericea of: .... 384.
M. xanthocentra (p. 635).
2.
Inflorescence determinate, a terminal capitulum maturing before those immediately below it and often larger than them; pods small, valvately dehiscent from apex downward, packed into dense (non-compressible) globose capitula; a polymorphic complex widespread over extratropical Brazil, Paraguay, and adj. Bolivia, Argentina and Uruguay, extending weakly n.-ward in Brazil into Mato Grosso, Goias, and Minas Gerais E(ii.9). subser. Dolentes (p. 578).
Series Mimosa, subordinate key IV: West Indies and S. America; stems armed; pinnae of some or all lvs more than 1-jug. 1.
Calyx paleaceous-pappiform or spathiform.
2.
Stems and lf-stks serially aculeate.
3.
Pinnae of larger lvs 5-10-jug.; s. Minas Gerais, Brazil 471.
M. widgrenii (p. 762).
3.
Pinnae of all lvs exactly 2-jug.; Yaracuy, Venezuela 320.
M. vexans (p. 532).
2.
Stems armed at or below each node with 1-3 aculei or unarmed, the lf-stks never armed; pinnae of longer lvs 2-5-jug. 4.
Lfts of longer pinnae 7-24-jug., the blades 3-6-nerved.
5.
Filaments connate through 0.4-1.2 mm; lfts more than 10-jug. and when scarcely more than 10-jug much over 2 mm wide E(ii.24). subser. Hirsutae (p. 690).
5.
Filaments free; lfts of longer pinnae 7-10-jug. and less than 2 mm wide 386.
M. morongii (p. 645).
4.
Lfts of longer pinnae 38-60-jug., the blades 1-nerved 383.
M. verecunda (p. 634).
1.
Calyx minute or obsolete.
6.
Pinnae subpalmately crowded at far end of lf-stk, less than 3 mm apart; no spicules between pinnapulvini E(U. 16). subser. Pudicae (p. 622).
6.
Pinnae 2-4-jug., inserted on If-rachis at intervals of 4-8 mm; a spicule between each pair of pinnapulvini 313.
M williamsii (p. 521).
Series Mimosa, subordinate key V: West Indies and S. America; stems unarmed; pinnae of some lvs more than 1-jug. 1.
Dispersed n. of the Equator, within and around periphery of Guayana Highland E(ii. 16). subser. Pudicae (p. 622).
1.
Dispersed s. of the Equator, in Brazil s. of 10°S, to Paraguay and n.-e. Argentina.
2.
Corolla retrostrigulose; subsp. elongata of: 462.
M. distans (p. 749).
2.
Corolla antrorsely puberulent or glabrous.
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 38-60-jug., the blades 1-nerved dorsally; calyx symmetricaUy pappiform; centr. and s.-e. Goias, Brazil; unarmed state of: 383.
M. verecunda (p. 634).
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 4-32-jug., the blades 3-9-nerved dorsally; calyx either symmetrically paleaceous or spathiform.
4.
Pinnae 2-4-jug., separated along If-rachis by intervals of ± 1-2 cm; virgate subshmbs over 1 m tall with elongate simple or branched, pseudoracemose inflorescence exserted far above the lvs, the stems and foliage glabrous or almost so; pod deeply constricted between articles, these glabrous like the replum and 9-13 mm diam.; s.-w. Goias and adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, BrazU 414.
M. discobola (p. 688).
4.
Pinnae either subpalmately crowded near tip of lf-stk or the interpinnal intervals less than 1 cm; inflorescence mostly axillary, but if pseudoracemose and exserted the pinnae not more than 2-jug. and the stems and foUage silky-pubescent; pod setose on replum and commonly also on valves, the replum only shallowly constricted and the articles 4-8 diam. 5.
Filaments connate through 0.6-1.8 mm; spp. numerous and diverse, of Brazilian Planalto, Paraguay, and n.-e. Argentina E(ii.24). subser. Hirsutae (p. 690).
5.
Filaments free; local in n.-e. Paraguay 385.
M. centurionis (p. 644).
E(ii.l).
Series MIMOSA subseries POLYCARPAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Polycarpae Bameby, subser. nov., hinc cum subser. Pudicis, petiolo espiculato diversis, illinc cum subser. Pedunculosis, plerisque inermibus, arete nexis.
Caules ad vel infra nodos armati; foliorum formula i-iv/8-36, petiolo vel rachi inter pinnamm paria spiculato; inftorescentia ab initio vel cito post anthesin foliata; calyx minutus vel rarius dimidiatus; fructus craspedialis.—Sp. typica: M. polycarpa Kunth.
Slender, sometimes sarmentose shrubs, subshrubs and suffruticulose herbs, armed at or below nodes with (1-)2 infrastipular and sometimes some accessory cauline aculei, the leaf-stalks either unarmed or dorsally aculeate; stipules mostly 3-11-, in M. williamsii and one var. of M. polycarpa 1-nerved; lf-formula i-iv/8-36, the lfstks (5-)6-45 mm, spiculate between pinna-pairs, the longer lfts 4.5-15 mm, 2-3-nerved; inflorescence of axillary or hysteranthously axillary, globose-ellipsoid capitula; calyx either minute or dimidiate, then dilated adaxially; coroUa-lobes either glabrous or antrorsely pubemlent; filaments free; fruit a (2-)3-5(-6)-seeded craspedium.
Spp. 4, of S. America s. and w. of Amazonia: e. slope of Andes from n. Pem to n.-e. Argentina, especially common and diverse in the Parana basin in Paraguay and adjoining countries.
A syndrome of spiculate leaf-stalks, armed stems, and reduced calyx characterizes subser. Polycarpae.
The typical species, conjugately pinnate M. polycarpa, resembles armed states of M. (subser. Pudicae) xanthocentra except for spiculate leaf-stalks and non-pappiform calyx, while plurijugate M. williamsii resembles, with the same reservations, M. (subser. Pudicae) verecunda.
The dwarf M. balansae closely approaches the ordinarily unarmed subser. Pedunculosae, and could perhaps be referred there.
A technical similarity in leaf-formula and pubescence between M. williamsii and the North American M. teledactyla is probably fortuitous, the latter lacking interpinnal spicules.
Conspectus of subser. Polycarpae Mimosa * Pinnae of all lvs exactly conjugate; plants at maturity ±7-20 dm tall.
310. polycarpa Kunth a. var. spegazzinii (Pirotta ex Hooker f) Burkart b. var. polycarpa c. var. redundans Bameby d. var. subandina Bameby 311. tenuipendula Burkart ** Pinnae of *, but plant dwarf, seldom over 5 dm.
312. balansae M. Micholi *** Pinnae of most lvs 2-4-jug., conjugate only in few random lower lvs; stature of*.
313. w////<2m5z7 Rusby Key to species of subser. Polycarpae 1.
Pinnae conjugate at tip of lf-stk. 2.
Stems 7-30 dm; lfts of longer pinnae 15-36-jug. 3.
Stems stiff" and lf-stks 0.4-0.7 mm diam.; capitula mostly 2-3 per node; replum of pod hispid with erect setae 2-4 mm; widespread in middle Parana basin in Paraguay, adj. Brazil, Bolivia, and Argentina, and along e. slope of the Andes from n.-w. Argentina to n. Pem 310.
M. polycarpa (p. 517).
3.
Stems very slender, pliant, and lf-stks 0.2-0.3 mm diam.; capitula solitary at each node; replum of pod hispidulous with setae ± 1 mm; local in n.-centr. Paraguay.
.
311.
M. tenuipendula (p. 520).
2.
Stems l^(-6) dm; lfts of longer pinnae 8-18(-"22")-jug. 4.
Midrib of lfts prominulous dorsally only at base and near apex of blade 312.
M. balansae (p. 520).
4.
Midrib of lfts continuously prominulous dorsally from base to apex; cf armed forms of M. brevipetiolata (p. 562).
1.
Pinnae of most lvs 2-4-jug., on distal half of lf-stk; Peru, Bolivia 313.
M. williamsii (p. 521).
310.
Mimosa polycarpa Kunth, Mimoses 8.
1819.—Typus infra sub var. polycarpa indicatur.
Subshrubs and bushy shrubs attaining 7-20 dm, often resembling M. xanthocentra in habit and foliage and like subsp. xanthocentra armed at all or most nodes with infrastipular broad-based stramineous aculei (1-)2-7(-8) mm, the virgate or paniculately branched stems, lf-stks and peduncles either hispid-pilose or subappressedstrigose with fine tapering setae to (0.6-) 1-2.5 mm mixed with minute pubemlence, the olivaceous subconcolorous lfts either glabrous or minutely pubemlent above, beneath thinly appressed-setose and sometimes also pubemlent, discontinuously or subcontinuously setose-ciliate, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula mostly 2-3-nate, rarely solitary in the axil of contemporary lvs, the immature ones sometimes forming a hysteranthously foliate pseudoraceme.
Stipules firmly chartaceous, lanceolate or lanceelliptic 5-8(-ll) X 1-2.4 mm, striately 1-11- nerved from base, dorsally either pubemlent, or setose, or rarely glabrous, almost always setoseciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including sensitive pulvinus (5-)7-27(-40) mm, at middle 0.4-0.7 mm diam., shallowly grooved ventrally and bearing an ascending spicule ±1-2 mm between the one pair of pinnae; rachis of pinnae 3-8 cm, the interfoliolar segments to 1.2-3.5 mm; lfts 12- 33(-35)-jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.6-2 mm distant from lance-subulate paraphyllidia 0.6-2 mm, the blades linear or linear-lanceolate from obtusangulate base, acute or apiculate, straight or obscurely arched forward, those near mid-rachis (6-)6.5-12(-15) x l-2.3(-3) mm, (4.7-)5-7(-7.5) times as long as wide, all veinless above, the subcentric midrib with l-2(-3) weak and short posterior nerves either prominulous or merely discolored beneath.
Peduncles 4-17(-20) mm; capitula without filaments 5-5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis either conelike or submoriform depending on length of bracts, these oblanceolate, eUiptic-obovate or rhombicoblanceolate ±1.5-3 mm, beyond middle pectinately setulose-ciliate, mucronate by excurrent midrib, the blade either glabrous or minutely pubemlent dorsally;y7c»v^r5 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx (further described under vars.) either minute or asymmetrically paleaceous, not over 1 mm; corollas narrowly funnelform 2-2.8 mm, the ovate cymbiform, strongly keeled but otherwise scarcely thickened lobes 0.65-0.9 x 0.4- 0.5 mm, dorsally glabrous or microscopically papillate-pubemlent; filaments pick or lilac-pink, exserted (4.5-)5-7.5(-8) mm.
Pods of weU-fertilized capitula to 10-18, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong (10-) 13-21 (-25) X 4-5mm,(2-)3- 4(-6)-seeded, the shallowly undulate replum 0.4- 0.55 mm wide, abmptly produced at apex into a subulate point 1-1.5 mm and armed with pluriseriate straight stramineous setae to (2-)2.5- 3.5(-4) mm, the papery, at first green but early brownish-stramineous valves coUiculate over each seed, at once pubemlent and hispid with suberect setae shorter and more slender than those of replum, when ripe separating from replum and dividing into rhombic or almost square, biconvex indehiscent, free-falling articles 2.5-4.5(-5) mm long; seeds rhombic-obovoid-lentiform 2.9- 3.4 X 2.5-2.9 mm, the testa dull brown-olivaceous, often fuscous-spotted.
In overall facies M. polycarpa resembles armed varieties of M. xanthocentra, but is effectively distinguished by a spicule at apex of petioles, by an either minute tmncate or asymmetrically paleaceous, not radially symmetrical pappiform calyx, and almost always by glabrous, not graypubemlent flowers.
Bentham's concept of M. polycarpa expressed in Flora brasiliensis (1876) encompassed all then available examples of M. xanthocentra var. xanthocentra and var. mansii.
Burkart's refined definition of the species (1948) is here adopted, but some internal adjustment is required.
Burkart admittedly saw neither the type nor the protologue of M. polycarpa and misapplied the epithet to the subcordilleran Argentine variety herein segregated as var. subandina.
He was unaware that the calyx of Kunth's plant was tmncate, like that of east-Argentine var. spegazzinii, not asymmetrically paleaceous Uke that of var. subandina.
The type of M. polycarpa appears almost exactly like average var. spegazzinii, except for relatively few and large leaflets and high-montane Pemvian habitat, remote from the main home of the species in the middle Paraguai basin.
Further collections from Pem are required before it can be stated unequivocally that two distinct taxa exist, for it is not impossible that the original M. polycarpa of Humboldt and Bonpland was introduced in the vicinity of the old Inca capital of Cajamarca.
The situation in Pem is complicated today by var. redundans (see below) in which the leaf-spicules, leaflets and calyx of var. polycarpa are combined with the onenerved stipules of sympatric M. incarum.
Field observation of var. redundans is much needed.
Burkart pointed out that the two varieties of M polycarpa native to Argentina differ not only in form of the calyx but also in pubescence of the upper face of leaflets, this present in the east but absent in the west.
However, much of the Paraguayan material that I refer to var. spegazzinii, because of a minute glabrous calyx, has leaflets hairless above, and Burkart's reliance on this accessory differential character has proved excessive.
Key to varieties of M polycarpa Entire calyx 0.2-0.3 mm, the tmncate or minutely denticulate rim either glabrous or microscopically ciliolate.
2.
Lfts of longer pinnae 22-25-jug.; abundant in centr. and s.-e. Paraguay and in Misiones, Argentina, extending feebly e. in Brazil to Mato Grosso do Sul and centr. S. Paulo, and w. into Sta. Cmz, Bolivia; epiphyllum of lfts either glabrous or puberulent 310a. var. spegazzinii (p. 518).
2.
Lfts of longer pinnae (10-)12-19-jug.; local above 2000 m in intermontane valleys of the centr. and n. Peruvian Andes.
3.
Stipules lanceolate, at least 5-nerved 310b. var. polycarpa (p. 518).
3.
Stipules setiform, 1-nerved 310c. var. redundans (p. 519).
Calyx-tube 0.2-0.3 mm, the rim asymmetrically produced on side opposed to the subtending bract into a setiform-decompound paleaceous lobe to 0.4-0.7 mm, this sometimes accompanied on either side by a shorter lobe or by a few free setulae; abundant in n.-w. Argentina, from Jujuy to Tucuman, weakly n. into Tarija and perhaps Sta. Cruz, Bolivia; lfts glabrous above 310d. var. subandina (p. 519).
310a. Mimosa polycarpa Kunth var. spegazzinii (Pirotta ex Hooker f.) Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 151, fig. 23C(pt).
1948.
M. spegazzinii Pirotta [Annuario Reale 1st.
Bot. Roma 3(2): 121, t. 13 (optima!).
1888, nom. provis.] ex Hooker f., Bot. Mag.
59, t. 7899.
1903.-"Native of Missiones, Argentine Republic .
.
. discovered there by [Carlo Luigi Spegazzini].
.
. who sent seeds to Professor R. Pirotta of Rome, by whom it was described.
Seeds of it were obtained for the Royal Gardens, Kew in 1900 from Dr. Hans Schinz, Director of the Botanic Garden, Zurich, a plant raised from which flowered freely in a stove [at K] in October, 1902."
— No authentic material found, but if none exists either of the cited illustrations could serve as lectotypus.
M. pachecensis S. Moore, Trans. Linn. Soc. London II, 4: 349.1895.—"[Paraguay.] Hab. in campis prope Puerto Pacheco, inter Asuncion et Commba ([S. Moore] N. 1058)."-Holotypus, collected 3.
II.1892, BM! M. polychaeta Malme, Ark. Bot. 23A(13): 48.
1931.- "[Brazil.
Mato Grosso do Sul:] Corumba .
.
.
9.
IV.1903 ([Malme, It.
RegneU.] II: 3061, florens)."-Holotypus, S! = NY Neg. 11849.
Lfts either glabrous or pubemlent on upper face, in larger lvs 22-jug. upward; calyx of var. polycarpa.
In campo thickets, in open bmsh-woodland, and colonially weedy in pastures and along highways, mostly below 400 m, locally abundant in centr. and s.-e. Paraguay and n.-w. Argentina (Misiones), extending n.-e. in Brazil to the Pantanal region in Mato Grosso do Sul and to centr. S. Paulo (Dois Corregos to Brotas), and w. into Sta. Cmz, Bolivia.-H. XI-IV, the fmit or the empty repla long persistent.—M^nc^; sensitiva.
Map 46.
310b. Mimosa polycarpa Kunth var. polycarpa.
M. polycarpa Kunth, 1819, I.e., t. 3, sens. str. — "Crescit in locis arenosis Pemviae, prope Caxamarca, alt. 1464 hexapodamm."
—Holotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland s.n.,
"Caxamarca," P-HBK!; isotypi, B-WILLD = F Neg. 1359\ P (hb. Bonpland.)! = NY Neg. 11806.
M. polycarpa sensu Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, 1824: 198; Bentham, 1841: 366; 1876: 315, minore ex parte, exclus. syn. et speciminibus citis; Macbride, 1943: 92.
MAP 46.
Parts of South America.
Range of three varieties of Af. polycarpa Kunth.
Lfts of longer pinnae 15-20-jug.; calyx tmncate, the rim glabrous or minutely ciliolate, not asymmetrically dilated.
On dry rocky or sandy hillsides and in streambeds of inter-Andean valleys above 2000 m, known from the Marafion basin in Cajamarca, Pem, and reported (Macbride, 1943) from Junm.-H. (?-)II-VI(-?).
Map 46.
310c. Mimosa polycarpa Kunth var. redundans Bameby, var. nov., omnino cum var. polycarpa congma nisi stipulis lineari-setaceis 0.5- 0.7 mm tantum latis 1 -nervUs diversa, hac nota ad M. incarum forsan vergens.—Pem.
Cajamarca: entre San Juan y Yumagual, km 146- 147 por la carretera San Juan-Cajamarca, 5.
IV.1982 (fl, fr immat), /.
G. Sanchez Vega 76<52.-Holotypus, NY.
Habit and foliage of var. polycarpa, but stipules linear-attenuate, not over 0.7 mm wide, 1 -nerved.
At edges of fields and along roadsides at ±2700-3000 m, within the common range of M. polycarpa var. polycarpa and M. incarum and possibly consisting ofhybrid derivatives ofthese, known only from deptos.
Cajamarca (prov. Cajamarca) and La Libertad (prov. Pataz) in the upper Marafion valley, Peru.—Fl.
III-V(-?).
The epithet redundans reflects the author's vexation by this plant which ought (considering the locality) to duplicate Humboldt's elusive M. polycarpa but in fact differs conspicuously in narrow one-nerved stipules.
These recall the also sympatric M. incarum, which differs more substantially in pubescence, in lack of spicule at tip of leaf-stalks, and in weakly retrostrigulose flowers.
Field observation of these weedy inter-Andean mimosas is required to sort out their relationships and test the constancy of the supposed differential characters.
310d. Mimosa polycarpa Kunth var. subandina Bameby, var. nov., a var. polycarpa et var. Spegazzinii vix nisi calyce asymmetrice paleaceo, contra bracteam suffmlcrantem in lobulos setoso-decompositos 1-3 producto diversa, ulterius dispersione subandina extratropica divergens. —Argentina.
Salta: depto. Campo Santo, Guemes, 3.
IV.1945 (fl, fr), C. A. O'DonneU 2696.—Holotypus, NY; isotypus, not seen but cited by Burkart, 1948 sub M. polycarpa, LIL.
M. polycarpa sensu Burkart, 1948:147-149,1.17 (right), sens, restr.; non Kunth.
Lfts of larger lvs 22-jug. upward, glabrous on upper face; calyx as described in diagnosis and in key to varieties.
On bmshy hUlsides and river banks, and weedy along highways, ascending to 600(-?) m, locally plentiful in subandean valleys of n.-w. Argentina, from Jujuy to Tucuman, and adj. Tarija, Bolivia; reported by Burkart (1948 sub M. polycarpa) from Sta. Cmz, Bolivia, this record to be confirmed. — R. XI-V(-?).
Map 46.
Several leaves of Venturi 8062 (UC) consist of two pairs of pinnae, such as were mentioned for M. stenoptera by Burkart (1948: 153, footnote 2).
This abnormality is so rare that I have not thought it worthwhile to provide a lead in the foregoing keys.
311.
Mimosa tenuipendula Burkart, Darwiniana 9: 389, fig. 1.
1951.-"Paraguay.
Puerto Casado (Chaco), cerro Galvan .
.
. leg. T. Rojas No. 3047, enero 1917."—Holotypus, SI (not seen); isotypi, G! K! M! US! Delicately diffiisely branching microphyllidious shrubs 2-3 m with slender, pliantly bending, subterete subglabrous stems armed at each node with a pair of gently recurved stramineous browntipped infrastipular aculei (0.5-)l-2.5(-3) mm, the If-pulvini densely and some intemodes and petioles remotely strigose or ascending-setulose, the olivaceous subconcolorous, discontinuously ciliate lfts microscopically pubemlent on both faces, some also thinly strigulose-setose beneath, the subcapillary peduncles solitary in a long succession of If-axils, the plumply ellipsoid capitula either surpassing or surpassed by the associated lf-stk but always surpassed by the whole If.
Stipules erect, subherbaceous becoming brownish papery, lanceolate (2.5-)3-7 x 0.6-1.2 mm. striately 5-7-nerved, subacicular-tipped, persistent.
Leafstalks 16-34 x 0.2-0.3 mm, the shallow open ventral sulcus terminated by an ascending spicule 0.4-1 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (1.5-)2-6 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.5(-1.7) mm; lfts 21-36-jug., subequilong except at very end of rachis, the unequal first pair 0.4-0.9 mm distant from erect subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.9 mm, the blades linear from auriculate base, subacute at apex, the larger ones (4.5-)5-8(-10) X (0.9-)l-1.3 mm, 5-7.5 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath 2- 3-nerved from pulvinule, the straight slender centric midrib impressed proximally, pallidly prominulous beyond mid-blade, the posterior nerve(s) very short or scarcely perceptible, the marginal cilia forwardly appressed, free through 0.4-0.8 mm.
Peduncles 1-2.5 cm; capitula without filaments 4-4.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but hispidulous with shortly projecting bracts, these oblanceolate, abmptly caudatecuspidate 1.1-1.9 X 0.6-0.8 mm, dorsally keeled and minutely puberulent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones small and staminate; calyx 0.2-0.3 mm, the scarcely lobulate rim glabrous; bisexual corollas narrowly vase-shaped 1.6-2 mm, the ovate cymbiform, scarcely thickened I-nerved lobes 0.7-0.8 x 0.4 mm; filaments (presumably pink) free, exserted ± 5 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately Unear-oblong 15-23 x 4-5 mm, (3-)4- seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, thinly hispidulous along back and sides with ascending setulae up to ± 1 mm, the papery, light brown valves strigulose with microscopically scabemlous, retrorsely appressed setae, when ripe breaking up into free-falling articles 3.5-4.5 mm long; seeds not seen.
On limestone outcrops near 200 m, known only from valley of rio Paraguay in the vicinity of Puerto Casado, near 22°20'S in depto. Boquer6n, Paraguay; to be sought in adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil.-R. X-I(-?).
312.
Mimosa balansae M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 28(7): 52, t. 18.
1883.-"[Paraguay:] Trinidad, [Balansa] n. 1479, Paraguari in pratis, n. 1479a, Villa Conception in pratis, n. 1835; Oct.-Mai."
—Lectotypus, Balansa 1479, G!; syntypi, no. 1479a, +B = F Neg. 1397\ M! S! M. balansae var. robusta Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 488 (=P1. hassler.
402).
1904.-"[Paraguay.] ... in campis San Bernardino, Nov. [Hassler] n. 3507."-Holotypus, G!; isotypus, NY!- Equated with M. balansae by Fortunato, 1989: 382.
M. balansae sensu Burkart, 1948: 143,fig.22B; 1987: 501, fig. 224a-d. Diffuse, when adiUt suffruticulose herbs l-4(-6) dm, with simple or few-branched stems radiating or weakly assurgent from a slender caudex surmounting a woody taproot, armed at or just below most or all nodes (and randomly on some lf-stks) with broad-based, gently recurved stramineous aculei to 1.5-6 mm, the stems (either throughout or only distally), lf-stks and peduncles hispidulous with scattered or crowded spreading setulae to 0.4-0.9 mm and often in addition minutely pubemlent, the foliage olivaceous subconcolorous, the lfts appressed-setulose beneath and often also pubemlent, above either glabrous or pubemlent, discontinuously setose-ciliolate, the small subglobose capitula solitary or geminate in the axil of approximately coeval Ivs, sometimes pseudoracemose in early praefloration but quickly lateral.
Stipules firm erect, linear-lanceolate (2-)3-7 x (0.4-)0.6-l mm, 3-5-nerved, commonly pubemlent dorsally, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of Ivs at fertUe nodes (5-)6-12 x 0.4-0.7 mm, the broad shallow ventral sulcus commonly terminating in a slender spicule 0.7-1.6 mm (this lacking in random lvs); pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 14-30(-33) mm, the interfoliolar segments 1-2.6 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 8-18 (fide Burkart. -22)-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.6-1.6 mm distant from subulate-attenuate greenish paraphyllidia 0.7-2.3 mm, the blades oblong or oblong-elUptic from obtusangulate or shallowly semicordate base, acute or mucronulate, those near mid-rachis (4-)4.5-9 X 1.4-2.5 mm, 2.7^.3 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath weakly 2-3- nerved from pulvinule, the simple midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, dorsally prominulous only at base and apex of blade, the interior (or only) posterior nerve faint and expiring below mid-blade, the outer one very short, the marginal setae free ±0.7-1.5 mm.
Peduncles (7-) 10-30 mm; capitula without filaments 5-8 x 4.5-6.5 mm, prior to anthesis either moriform or hispid with emergent tips of bracts, these 1.5-3.7 mm. oblong-elUptic 0.5-0.7 mm wide, embracing base of corolla and thence abmptly apiculate or acuminate-caudate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some commonly staminate; calyx-tube membranous glabrous 0.15-0.3 mm, its rim either naked or with minute setulae mostly less than 0.2 (rarely attaining 0.6) mm; corolla narrowly turbinate 1.9-2.6 mm, the membranous ovate, shallowly concave 1-nerved lobes 0.6-1 x 0.4-0.65 mm, minutely pubemlent or papillose extemally; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 4-5.5 mm.
Pods to 20 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile undulately oblong (7-) 10-19 x 3^.5 mm, (2-)3- 5-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.3- 0.4 mm wide, thinly hispid, especiaUy along sides, with divaricately spreading pallid setae to (1-)2- 5 mm, the papery fuscous valves elevated over each seed, at once pubemlent and setose with finer shorter setulae, breaking up when ripe into free-falling indehiscent biconvex articles ± 3 mm long; seeds obtusely rhomboid-lentiform ±3 x 2.5 mm, the smooth testa pale brown.
In vemally moist and dry sandy campos, becoming weedy in hard-packed soil along highways and railroad tracks, mostly below 350 m, locally plentiful in the basins of rios Paraguai, Parana and Umguai from near 25°S in Paraguay s. in Argentina to near 33°S in Entre Rios, e. just into Umguay, to be expected on the e. bank of rio Umguai in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.-Fl.
X-IV(-V).
313.
Mimosa williamsii Rusby, Bull. New York Bot. Gard. 8: 91.
1912.-"[Bolivia.
La Paz:] San Buena Ventura [on rio Beni opposite Rurrenabaque] 1400 ft.,
Nov. 15, 1901 ([R. S. Williams] No. 659)."-Holotypus, NY! Soft-woody sarmentose shrubs attaining ±2 m, armed close below and randomly between nodes of bluntly ribbed stems and serially on dorsal rib of lf-stks and pinna-rachises with recurved, stramineous brown-tipped aculei to 1-3 mm, the stems in addition hispid with straight, widely ascending or spreading, smooth terete sordid setae to ±1-1.8 mm, the subconcolorous lfts either glabrous or pubemlent facially or some thinly appressed-setose dorsally, all discontinuously appressed-setose-ciliate, the plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary and paired in a series of Ifaxils on peduncle much shorter than subtending If.
Stipules Unear-lanceolate 3-5.5 x 0.4-0.7 mm, puberulent and prominently 1-nerved dorsally, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (disregarding depauperate uppermost lvs) 2.5-4.5 cm, shallowly openly grooved ventraUy, the petiole ±2- 3 cm X 0.35-0.5 mm, the interpinnal segments 4-8 mm; an ascending stramineous spicule ± 1- 1.5 mm between each pair of pinnae; pinnae (1-)2-4-jug., subequilong or irregularly graduated, the rachis (3-)3.5-5.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.3-2.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20-32(-34)-jug., subequilong except at each end of rachis, the first pair ±1-1.5 mm distant from unequal subulate 1-nerved paraphyllidia 0.8-1.4 mm, the blades narrowly lance-oblong from obtusangulate base, abmptly cuspidate, those near mid-rachis 6-9 x 1.3-1.8 mm, ±4- 5 times as long as wide, all nerveless or nearly so above, beneath 2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the slender midrib centric distally, simple or faintly 1-3-branched, the posterior nerve(s) weak or scarcely perceptible.
Peduncles 8-20 mm; capitula (little known at anthesis) without filaments ±6 X 4.5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the receptacle 3-4 mm long; bracts 1.2-1.6 x 0.2- 0.3 mm, glabrous 1-nerved dorsally, setose-ciliate, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, probably only some distal ones bisexual; calyx membranous, either symmetrically or asymmetrically shallow-campanulate 0.2-0.3 mm, sometimes almost obsolete on abaxial side; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 1.6-2.1 mm, the tube glabrous, the cymbiform, dorsally slender-carinate, antrorsely pubemlent lobes 0.6-0.8 x 0.45-0.5 mm; filaments (presumably pink) free, exserted ±5 mm.
Pods ±3-6 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong 20-27 x 6 mm, 3-5-seeded, the undulate-constricted replum 0.7-0.8 mm wide, abmptly contracted into an erect terminal cusp, armed on back and sides with stiff erect tapering setae to 2.5-4.5 mm, the dark brown, stiffly papery valves low-convex over each seed, either glabrous or residually minutely puberulent, breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 3.5-6 mm long; seeds (of type) lentiform, in broad view 3.3 x 2.8 mm, the testa dull dark brown.
In thickets at ±350-450 m, known only from the e. piedmont and low intermontane valleys of the Pemvian and Bolivian Andes in lat. 10°20'- 14°30'S: on the sources of rio Pachitea in prov. Oxapampa of depto. Pasco in Pem, and on the upper rio Beni in La Paz, BoUvia.—Fl. (?-)VIX(-?).
At a casual glance M. williamsii may easily be mistaken for a hispid form of M. pudica, but differs in these features: both leaf-stalk and pinna-rachises serially aculeate in the manner of subser. Castae; conspicuously spiculate leafstalks; and pinnae separated along leaf-rachis by relatively wide intervals.
I speculate that its closest ally is M. polycarpa, in relation to which it stands as does M. verecunda to M. xanthocentra in subser. Pudicae, the two to four pairs of pinnae being in each case independently derived by reduplication from a conjugate-pinnate forebear.
The two known examples of M. williamsii are different in small details, the Pemvian plant differing from the Bolivian type in facially glabrous, not pubemlent leaflets, and in symmetrical, not minutely spathiform calyx.
The significance of this diversity cannot be evaluated without much more plentiful material.
E(ii.2).
Series MIMOSA subseries PECTINATAE (Bentham) Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Pectinatae (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. Mimosa ser. Pectinatae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 365.
1842.—Sp. typica: M. pectinata Kunth = M. pectinatipinna Burkart.
M. ser. Pectinatae Bentham, 1875: 395, minore ex parte, exclus. spp. 34-38.
Stiffly branched, microphyllous shrubs and shrublets, armed at nodes with a pair of ascending infrastipular aculei; stipules subulate 1 -nerved; petioles 1-3 mm, minutely spiculate or the spicule sometimes lacking; leaflets 7-26-jug., either 2-nerved or extemally nerveless, the longest 3- 5 mm; capitula globose, solitary or paired in the axil of contemporary lvs; calyx either pappiform or minute glabrous; corolla-lobes antrorsely pubemlent; filaments free; fruit a craspedium.
Spp. 2, of arid inter-Andean valleys in n. Pem (Piura, Cajamarca, Amazonas).
This pair of small, stiffly woody shmbs armed at each node with a pair of straight, horizontal or widely acroscopic aculei, are remarkable for the small size of the subsessile V-shaped leaves.
Despite marked differences in calyx and spicules (these always, when present, very small and perhaps easily suppressed), they seem certainly related to one another and, coUectively, perhaps to M. polycarpa, from which they may plausibly by derived.
Only M. pectinatipinna was known to Bentham, who associated it, for no obvious reason, with the south Brazilian M. orthacantha. a species of very different ecology that differs materially in perfectly glabrous leaflets, long setose indumentum of most stems, and in particular in the predominance of one infrapetiolar aculeus at each cauline node.
Conspectus of subser. Pectinatae Mimosa 314. pectinatipinna burkart 315. ctenodes Bameby Key to species of subser. Pectinatae 1.
Lfts of larger pinnae 12-25-jug., the longer ones 6.5-8 times as long as wide, all dorsaUy 1-2-nerved and puberulent but not strigose; calyx pappiform, including setiform cilia 0.9-1.3 mm; faces of pod densely puberulent and strigulose 314.
M. pectinatipinna (p. 523).
1.
Lfts of larger pinnae 7-10-jug., the longer ones ±3.5^.5 times as long as wide, all dorsally veinless and strigose-setulose; calyx-rim either naked or charged at tip of each tooth with a minute setula, the whole 0.2-0.3 mm; faces of pod glabrous lustrous 315.
M. ctenodes (p. 524).
314.
Mimosa pectinatipinna Burkart, Darwiniana 7(4): 523.
1947, based on M. pectinata Kunth, Mimoses 5, t. 2.
1819. nom. illeg.— "Crescit locis calidis Andium Guamanensium in ripa fluvii Guancabamba, inter pagos Gualtaquilla et Sondorillo, altitudine 1030 hexapodamm [near 930 m] a mari (Regno Quitensi [near 5°20'S in present depto. Piura prov. Huancabamba, Peru])."—Holotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland 3570, P-HBK!; isotypus, B-WILLD 19059, seen in microform!-Non M. pectinata (Willdenow) Poiret, 1810.
M. pectinata sensu Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, 1824: 250; Bentham, 1841: 366; 1875: 396 (but not "near Quito"); Macbride, 1943: 91.
Stiffly branched drought-deciduous microphyllous shrubs 8-30 dm, with tortuous woody branchlets, armed at all or most nodes with 1-2 horizontal or widely ascending, straight broadbased aculei 4-10 mm, the young stems and lf-axes at once finely pubemlent and either strigulose or pilosulous with slender, sometimes microscopically scabemlous setulae less than 1 mm, the foliage olivaceous concolorous, the lfts minutely pubemlent on both faces and discontinuously setulose-ciliolate, the small globose capitula axiUary to coeval lvs.
Stipules erect subulate 2-3.5 X 0.2-0.4 mm, early dry, at length deciduous. i>^/-5/fl/fcs including piUvinus 1-2.5 X 0.3- 0.5 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 6-17 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.5 mm; lfts I2-26-jug., markedly decrescent at each end of rachis (the expanded If-blade consequently elliptic in outline), the first pair 0.3-0.6 mm distant from minute subulate paraphyllidia, the blades linear from auriculate base, mucronulate at apex, those near mid-rachis 3-5 x 0.4-0.7 mm, 6.5- 8 times as long as wide, all veinless above, 2-nerved beneath, the posterior nerve weaker than the pallid midrib.
Peduncles solitary or paired 7-15 mm; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds gray-pubemlent; bracts linear-elliptic 1-1.4 mm, dorsally pubemlent and setulose-ciliolate; flowers with pappiform calyces 0.8-1.3 mm, the tube 0.1-0.3 mm, the longer setae 0.7-1 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 1.8-2.1 mm, the oblong obtuse concave lobes ±0.6 x 0.5 mm; filaments reportedly either pink or white, perhaps opening pink and fading whitish, free to base, exserted ±4 mm.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) several from above mid-receptacle, sessile, in profile undulately linear and gently incurved, ± 15-24 x 4- 5 mm, (2-)3-4-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum ±0.4 mm wide, the papery valves lowcolliculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike at once densely pubemlent and strigulose with forwardly subappressed setulae scarcely 1 mm, the valves breaking up into free-falling articles ± as long as wide.
In thom-scrub, often associated with Cactaceae, ±350-1000 m, endemic to inter-Andean valleys of the rio Maraiion basin between 5° and 6°S in n. Pem, from s.-e. Piura (prov. Huancabamba) to n. Cajamarca (prov. Jaen) and adj. Amazonas (prov. Bagua).—Fl.
III-IV(-?), the fuU season unknown.
315.
Mimosa ctenodes Bameby, sp. nov., notulis plurimis cum M. pectinatipinna congruens eique certe affinis, sed stipulis minutis, foliolis 7-10 (nec 12-25)-jugis dorso eveniis setulosostrigosis, calycis ore vel nudo vel parcissime ciliolato (nec pappiformi), necnon leguminis valvulis glabris lucidis (nec dense strigosis) diversa.—Pem.
Cajamarca: Prov. Celendin, desert slopes, 910-1160 m, rio Maraiion valley on Balsas-Celendin road 1-5 km from Balsas (6°50'S, 78°04'W), 23.11.1984 (fl, fr), D. N. Smith 6770.—Holotypus, MO; isotypi, K, NY, US. Stiffly erect microphyllidious shrubs ±5-10 dm, the closely branched, flexuous striate branches armed at each node with a pair of straight ascending stramineous infrastipular aculei 1.5-5 mm, finely pubemlent throughout and the stems, lf-axes and dorsal face of lfts in addition strigulose with fine, narrowly ascending or subappressed setulae less than 1 mm, the small globose capitula solitary and few geminate in Ifaxils of homotinous branchlets.
Stipules subulate-setiform not over 1 mm, often concealed by aculei.
Leaf-stalks including scarcely dilated pulvinus 1.5-3 X 0.3-0.5 mm, the shallow or obscure sulcus closed at apex by a minute spicule; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 7-12 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-0.9(-1.2) mm; lfts 7-10-jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.7-1 mm distant from minute subulate paraphyllidia, the blades narrowly oblong from semicordate base, apiculate, those at mid-rachis 3.5- 5 X 0.8-1.2 mm, 3.5-4.4 times as long as wide, all extemally veinless on both faces, the plane margin discontinuously appressed-ciliolate.
Peduncles 8-14 mm; capitula without filament 3.5- 4.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the linear-oblanceolate bracts 0.6-1.1 mm, puberulent distally, the obtuse fl-buds gray-pubemlent;y/ow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, the lower ones staminate; calyx membranous campanulate, extemally glabrous 0.2-0.3 mm, the tmncate or inequilaterally denticulate rim either naked or each tooth tipped with a short setula; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 1.6-1.8 mm, the cymbiform 1-nerved lobes 0.6-0.7 x 0.4-0.45 mm; filaments whitish, free to base, exserted 3.5-4 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately broad-linear, subrecurved, (17-)20- 27 X 6-7 mm, (2-)3-4-seeded, rounded at each end but apiculate by the style-base, the shallowly constricted replum 0.25-0.4 mm diam., thinly appressed-strigulose, the papery brown glabrous lustrous valves low-colliculate and fuscous over each seed, finely reticulate-nerved, breaking up into free-falling articles about as long as wide; ripe seeds unknown.
In xeromorphic scrub-cactus association near 800-1150 m, known only from the valley of rio Maran6n at ±6°50'S in Cajamarca, Pem, to be expected across river in adj. depto. Amazonas.— Fl.
I-III, V, the full season unknown.
Mimosa ctenodes is clearly and closely related to M. pectinatipinna, which is endemic to the valley of rio Maraiion and its western tributaries about 130 kilometers downstream from Balsas, but it is clearly different in leaflet-number (7-10, not 12-25 pairs per pinna), in leaflets at once veinless and strigulose beneath, in its almost or completely naked (not pappiform) calyx, and in lustrous glabrous craspedia.
The species was first collected in flower by Paul Hutchison and J. K. Wright, in May 1964 (5434, K, NY).
E(ii.3).
Series MIMOSA subseries CASTAE (Bentham) Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Castae (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Castae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 363.
1842, exclus. omnibus praeter typum.—Sp. typica: M. casta Linnaeus.
M. II. Castae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 144, in clave.
1928.
M. ser. Castae sensu Bentham, 1875: 393, ex parte (spp. 19, 20, 40, caeteris exclusis).
Weakly fmticose, diffuse or sarmentose vines armed on stems, lf-stks and dorsal rib of some or all lf-stks (and often of pinna-axes) with files of cat's-claw aculei; stipules 1-3-nerved; petioles 0.5-10.5 cm, commonly but not invariably spiculate;/7//2/t<2^ 1-, in anomalous M. vexans 2-jug.; lfts (3-)4-50-jug., 3-7-, in M. rusbyana mostly 1-nerved, the longest (5-)6-36 mm; inflorescence mostly of axillary capitula, some shortly pseudoracemose in praefloration; calyx either paleadispersal are the leading characters of this small ceous-pappiform or much reduced; fUaments free; group which, by way of paucifoliolate M. casta, fruit a sessUe or short-stipitate, (2-)3-5(-6)-seedleads directly into subser. Mimosa.
The subser. ed craspedium.
Castae as defined herein is equivalent to only the Spp. 5: 2 widely dispersed at low elevations core of ser. Castae Bentham, which embraced a over tropical S. America from n. Colombia and miscellany of not very closely related aculeate adj. Panama e. to the Guianas, s. in Brazil to species, even including M dolens.
Despite a secAmazonas and Para and w. to trans-Andean Pem, ond pair of pinnae, which prevents a neat defin. disjunctly to Guatemala, and through Lesser nition of the subseries, I feel obliged to refer here Antilles to Puerto Rico; one local in n. Venethe poorly known M. vexans, which in everyzuela; and two local in sub-Andean s. Pem and thing but leaf-formula agrees closely with M. Bolivia. schrankioides.
In the context of the whole series Vining growth-habit, seriaUy prickly stems and Mimosa it seems probable that the second pair leaf-stalks, one pair (or in anomalous M. vexans of pinnae has been acquired through duplication, two pairs) of pinnae, a prevalence of interpinnal and has no phylogenetic connection with the pluspicules, three or more pairs of leaflets per pinna, Tipinnate ser. Myriophyllae or sect. Habbasia. and a mostly lowland macrothermic pattem of Conspectus of subser. Castae Mimosa * Pinnae 1 pair; lfts 8 pairs upward. t Of Andean Peru and Bolivia.
316. rw^Z^j^fl/i^ Bameby & Fortunato 317. cuzcoana Macbride tt Of lowland Amazonia n.-ward.
318. schrankioides Bentham a. var. sagotiana (Bentham) Bameby b. var. schrankioides ** Pinnae 1 pair; lfts 3-6 pairs.
319. ca5^fl! Linnaeus *** Pinnae 2 pairs; lfts 15-19 pairs; n. Venezuela 320.
M. vexans Bameby Key to species of subser. Castae 1.
Pinnae of all lvs exactly 1-jug.; widespread.
2.
Lfts of each pinna 8-50-jug. 3.
The lfts of longer pinnae 35-50-jug. and less than 2.5 mm wide; Depto.
La Paz, BoUvia 316.
M. rusbyana (p. 525).
3.
The lfts of longer pinnae (8-)9-l 7-jug. and s. of the Equator some or aU over 2.5 mm wide.
4.
Petioles 8-30 mm; stems glabrous; inter-Andean valleys of s. Pem (Depto.
Cuzco) near 2000 m 317.
M. cuzcoana (p. 527).
4.
Petioles 25-100 mm; stems commonly pubemlent or hispidulous or both, exceptionaUy glabrescent; Amazonia n.-ward, below 500 m 318.
M schrankioides (p. 528).
2.
Lfts of each pinna 3-5(-6)-jug; subequatorial BrazU n.-ward 319.
M. casta (p. 530).
1.
Pinnae of aU lvs 2-jug., the two pairs close together near tip of lf-stk but not palmate; n. Venezuela (Yaracuy) 320.
M. vexans (p. 532).
316.
Mimosa rusbyana Bameby & Fortunato, necnon filamentis albis M. schrankioidem sisp. nov., habitu sarmentoso, caulibus petiolmulans, sed foliomm petiolis abbreviatis 5- isque copiose seriatim aculeatis, calycis forma 16 (nec 35-100) mm longis foliolisque plus quam duplo numerosioribus 35-50 (nec ± 1 0- 17)-jugis usque primo intuitu, ulterius patria submontana (nec macrothermica hylaeana) diversa; a M. williamsii, habitu domoque congma, foliomm pinnis mono-, nec polyzygis facilius distinguitur.—Bolivia.
La Paz: Prov. Sur Yungas, "Meguilla, 4000 ft.,
" i.e., rio Miguilla near Caiiamina, 16°35'S, 67°20'W, 14.
VIII.1921 (fl), H. H. Rusby i09.-Holotypus, NY.
Weakly leaning or clambering, prickly subshrubs of unknown dimensions, with simply virgate or irregularly ramified annotinous and hornotinous branches, erratically armed on bluntly 8-10-ribbed intemodes and on dorsal rib of many lf-axes with scattered broad-based recurved, stramineous brown-tipped aculei 1-2.5 mm, the stems, petioles and peduncles in addition hispid with stiff but slender, declined brownish setae to 0.7-2 mm and in addition densely pubemlent, the rachis of pinnae hispid with erect or antrorse setae, the foliage bicolored, when dry brown-olivaceous above, paler beneath, minutely pilosulous-puberulent on both faces and dorsally finely strigose-setulose, discontinuously setose-ciliate, the small globose or plumply ovoidellipsoid capitula mostly surpassed by a subtending If, sometimes a few very shortly pseudoracemose in praefloration.
Stipules erect incurved setiform 2.5-6 x 0.2-0.4 mm, 1-nerved, pubemlent dorsaUy, distantly setose-ciliate, becoming dry and fragile.
Petioles (5-)6-16 mm, at middle 0.3-0.7 mm diam., shallowly grooved ventrally, bearing between the one pair of pinnae a yellowish spicule 0.7-1.6 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis in primary cauline lvs 5.5-11 cm, in some diminished distal ones (no further described) a little shorter, the interfoliolar segments 1-2.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae ±35-50-jug., gradually decrescent distally, more abmptly so proximally, the small first pair 0.5-1.3 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.7-1.5 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from obtusangulate base, abmptly acute mucronulate, those near midrachis (5-)6-10 X (0.9-)1.2-2.4 mm, aU veinless above, the slightly displaced unbranched midrib weakly prominulous beneath, 1-2 very short posterior venules sometimes also perceptible, the setulose cilia forwardly subappressed, not over 0.05 mm diam. at base.
Peduncles soUtary and geminate 7-25 mm; capitula without filaments ±4 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid fl-buds minutely pubemlent; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1-1.4 X 0.2-0.3 mm, 1-nerved, glabrous dorsally, the distal margins bearing a few spreading-ascending setulae to 0.4-0.6 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, many proximal ones staminate; calyx pappiform, the submembranous tube 0.15-0.2 mm, its rim charged with lustrous setulae ±0.5-0.9 mm; corolla narrowly funnelform (1.5-) 1.7-2.1 mm, the membranous ovate, weakly keeled pubemlent lobes 0.6-0.7 x 0.4-0.55 mm; filaments white, free to base, exserted 4-5 mm; anthers 0.25-0.3 mm diam.; ovary at anthesis glabrous, shortly stipitate.
Pods 1 — 4 per capitulum, undulately narrow-oblong in profUe, 20-34 x 6-7 mm, (2-)3-5-seeded, at base abmptly contracted into a sometimes cryptic stipe 0.8-1.5 mm, at apex into an erect cusp 1.5-3 mm, the replum 0.5-0.6 mm diam., at once pubemlent and weakly armed along back and sides with straight yellowish-brown smooth setae to 1-2 mm, the papery, densely pubemlent valves low-colliculate over each seed and there thinly hispid like the replum, when ripe breaking up into free-falling indehiscent articles 4.5-7 mm long; seeds (few seen) in broad profile obtusely rhombic-ovate ± 4 x 3 mm, the smooth testa fuscous dull.
On steep rocky hillsides in disturbed dry forest and on stream banks, ± 800-1300 m, known only from the basin of rio Bopi in the province of Sur Yungas, department of La Paz, Bolivia.—Fl. (?-)V-IX(-?).
Map 47.
In general aspect M. rusbyana is weedy and undistinguished, but it presents to close observation a strong syndrome of specific characters: aculei scattered alike on intemodes and leafstalks, a spicule between the one pair of multifoliolate pinnae, and a pappiform calyx.
Most of these features coincide in some populations of the lowland macrothermic M. schrankioides, but this differs in having less than 20, not 30-50 pairs of leaflets per pinna.
Tetrandrous mimosas sympatric or vicariant in sub-Andean Bolivia with M. rusbyana are M. boliviana, M. polycarpa and M. williamsii.
The first of these differs conspicuously in plumose cauline setae, the second in fewer aculei and glabrous flowers, the third in 2- 4 pairs of pinnae per leaf, and the two last further in campanulate calyx without pappiform fringe of cilia.
The very common and polymorphic M. xanthocentra contains forms similar to M. rusMAP 47.
The Caribbean and Amazon basins.
Ranges of M casta Linnaeus, M. cuzcoana Macbride, and M. rusbyana Bameby. byana in scattered cauline aculei and pappiform calyx, but these have 3-7 (not l)-nerved stipules and unarmed, espiculate leaf-stalks.
Rusby deliberately spelled the type-locality as "Meguilla" (cf his Maytenus meguillensis), but it is evidently the rio Miguilla of maps.
According to his field-book (NY) Rusby collected at Caiiamina on August 11-14, 1921, about Espia at the mouth of the Miguilla on August 12, and at "Meguilla" on August 14-16.
There are at NY, in addition to the type, two Rusby collections (2187, 2189) lacking locaUty data, but very likely from the same region, where the species was recollected (near Calisaya) by Krukoff in 1939 and (between Chulumani and Asunto) by Stephan Beck in 1985 (both NY).
317.
Mimosa cuzcoana Macbride, Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 13 (R. Pem) 3(1): 88.
1943. —"[Peru.] Cuzco: .
.
.
Paucartambo, Prov. Convenci6n, [C] Vargas [C] 518, type "—Holotypus, collected 30.
IX.1937 (fl), F 9091201 = F Neg. 54825; isotypus, LIL, seen in photo, NY (misit M. Lavin)\; paratypus, Herrera 908, F (fragm. ex B)\~Soukup 817, cited as paratypus, is mentioned in discussion (infra).
Shrubby or very likely sarmentose but of unknown potential stature, armed on subterete intemodes and on back of all lf-axes with open files of broad-based subrecurved, stramineous browntipped aculei 1-3 mm, glabrous except for residually puberulent lf-axes and discontinuously appressed-setose Ift-margins, the lfts deep green, a little paler beneath, the subglobose capitula mostly 2-3 together in If-axils and immersed in foliage, or some distal ones in a shortly exserted efoliate pseudoraceme.
Stipules firm erect-incurved, narrowly lanceolate 2.5-5 x 0.4-1 mm, coarsely 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 0.8-3 cm, at middle 0.6-1.5 mm diam., the ventral groove bridged at apex and charged with a small ascending spicule; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 3.5- 10 cm, charged behind each 1ft with an appressed setule, the interfoliolar segments 2.5-6 mm; lfts 9-15-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the unequal first pair 1.5-3 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.8-1.5 mm, the blades lance-oblong from obtusangulate base, abmptly deltate-acuminulate, those near mid-rachis 12- 18 X 3-5.5 mm, 3.3-4 times as long as wide, all 4-5-nerved from pulvinule, the moderately displaced midrib pinnately 3-6-branched on each side, the inner posterior nerve brochidodrome near or beyond mid-blade, the venation faintly discolored but immersed on upper face, sharply prominulous beneath, the marginal setae 0.1- 0.15 mm diam., free for ±0.5 mm.
Peduncles 12-18 mm; capitula without filaments ±8 x 5.5- 6 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse 4-angulate fl-buds microscopically papillate; bracts narrowly elliptic ± 1.5 x 0.4 mm, carinate and glabrous dorsally, microscopically ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, glabrous, some lower ones staminate and a little longer than the rest; calyx membranous campanulate 0.3-0.4 mm, shortly 4-lobulate, each lobule sometimes tipped with a minute clavate setule; corolla narrowly turbinate 2.3-2.5 mm, the shaUowly concave 1-nerved lobes 0.8-1 x 0.6-0.7 mm, scarcely thickened at tip; filaments pink, free to base, exserted ± 5 mm.
Pods not seen, described in protologue as 30-40 X 7 mm, the replum densely setose.
On bmshy hillsides near 2000 m, known only from the valley of rio Urubamba in prov. Urubamba and adj. La Convenci6n in depto. Cuzco, Pem.—Fl. lX-1—Mechicallo.
Map 47.
The poorly known M. cuzcoana has all technical characters of subser. Castae and appears only precariously distinct from M. schrankioides var. sagotiana, which it resembles in small, glabrous or almost glabrous calyx, in essentially glabrous stems and dark green, facially glabrous leaflets, in shorter leaf-stalks, and in submontane habitat.
Mimosa insidiosa, with which Harms considered it comparable, has retrorsely hispid stems, continuously marginate leaflets, and is endemic to eastem Brazil.
The specimen from Lapanmarca in prov. La Convenci6n, Soukup 817 (Fl), cited in the protologue of M. cuzcoana, differs as follows: aculei smaller (to ±1 mm), accompanied by loosely retrorse setaculei; foliage pilosulous, the lfts finely so on both faces and in addition setulose-strigulose beneath; lfts of longer pinnae 20-30-jug., the longer ones ±9-12 x 1.5-2.5 mm, less emphatically venulose beneath.
I am unable to classify this collection satisfactorily.
318.
Mimosa schrankioides Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 86.
1846.—Typus infra sub var. schrankioide indicatur.
Prickly, sarmentose or when unsupported sprawling, weakly woody shrubs with habit and stature of M. casta, differing constantly only in lf-formula, the aculeate stems and lf-stks commonly hispidulous with erect or widely declined tawny setulae to 0.5-1 mm, but sometimes only minutely pubemlent or glabrate, the bicolored lfts likewise variable in vesture, commonly minutely pubemlent on both faces, sometimes also (or instead) strigose on one or both faces with forwardly appressed slender setae, sometimes glabrous except for the slender, forwardly appressed setose cilia, these mostly less than 0.1 mm diam., and not forming a continuous callous margin.
Stipules of M. casta, 2-6.5 x 0.3-0.7 mm.
Leaf-stalks 2.5-9(-10) cm, at middle 0.5- 1 mm diam., the terminal spicule 0.3-0.6 mm or sometimes wanting; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 4-6.5 cm, the segments between pairs of lfts and between first pair and paraphyllidia 2.5-5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (8-)10- I6(-17)-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the blades in outline broadly linear or Unear-oblong from obtusangulate or shallowly semicordate base, at apex deltately acute or obtuse mucronulate, straight or slightly incurved, the larger ones 11-26 x 2-6.5 mm, 3.6-5.7 times as long as wide, all 3-5-nerved from pulvinule, the only slightly excentric midrib usually severalbranched from below middle upward, the 1 anterior nerve, if present, very slender and submarginal, the inner posterior one expiring or weakly brochidodrome beyond mid-blade, the outer ones progressively shorter.
Peduncles ± 1- 2 cm; capitula without filaments 3.5-5(-5.5) mm diam., prior to anthesis either moriform with shortly emergent bract-tips or the 4-angulate flbuds covered by intermeshed bracteal cUia; bracts subUnear 1-2.2 x 0.2 mm, glabrous 1-nerved dorsally, distally ciUate with setulae 0.4-1.2 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some proximal ones staminate; calyx (described in key to vars.) either minute membranous or paleaceous-pappiform; corolla of M. casta, 1.4-2.4 mm, either glabrous or pubemlent distally; filaments white or pink, free, exserted 6-7.5 mm.
Pods commonly 3-10 per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly or broadly oblong 18-40 x (6-)7-12 mm, (2-)3-4- seeded, the very shallowly constricted replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, contracted into an apical cusp 1.5-5 mm, hispid along back and sides with erect stramineous brown-tipped setae or setaculei to 2-5 mm, the papery brown valves similarly setaculeate overall but between setae either glabrous or densely softly pubemlent, the free-falling articles 4-8 mm long; seeds (few seen) ±4 x 3.2 mm, dull brown.
Mimosa schrankioides, as here interpreted, is variable in detail, but readily distinguished in all its forms from related M. casta and M. rusbyana by leaflet-number alone (see foregoing key to subser. Castae).
I am uneasy about combining in this one species forms that differ greatly in development of floral bracts and calyx, but M. schrankioides sens. str. and M. sagotiana, when defined by these characters, are no longer, as Bentham thought, separable by width of pods or by venulation of leaflets.
Davidse 13793 (NY) from Apure, Venezuela is an example of the reduced calyx of sagotiana coincident with the narrow pod (±6 mm wide) of ideal schrankioides.
Each variety described herein is variable in pubescence and width of pods, but due to lack of adequate material the intraspecific variation of M. schrankioides cannot be analyzed profitably at present.
Key to varieties of M. schrankioides I. Roral bracts shortly ciliolate, prior to anthesis not concealing the fl-buds; calyx membranous 0.1-0.4 mm, the rim irregularly lobulate or subentire, eciliate; coroUa glabrous; n. Colombia to the Guianas and the Amazon basin.
Central America 318a. var. sagotiana (p. 529).
1.
Floral bracts strongly ciliate, the fl-buds prior to anthesis covered by a mesh of setae; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 1-1.2 mm, the 4 lobes deeply setiform-decompound; corolla-lobes densely puberulent; periphery of Guayana Highland; n.- e. Colombia (rio Casanare), Cordillera Costanera in n. Venezuela.
318b. var. schrankioides (p. 529).
318a. Mimosa schrankioides Bentham var. sagotiana (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. sagotiana Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 394.
1875 & in Martius, ¥1. bras. 15(2): 311, descr. ampliat.
1876.—".
.
. ad flumen Amazonas infra Rio Negro: Poppig; etiam in Cayenna: Sagot n. 1063."—Lectotypus, Sagot 1063, K(hb. Benth.)! = NYNeg.
1785; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1369, BM! G! M! P! S! W!; syntypus, Poppig s.n.,
W!—Af. schrankioides var. glabra Sagot ex Bentham, 1876, I.e., nom. nud. in syn. M. santanderensis Britton & Rose ex Britton & Killip, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 35: 151.
1936.-"Puerto Wilches, Santander, Colombia . .. November 28, 1926, Killip & Smith 7^795."-Holotypus, NY!; isotypus, US! M. antioquensis sensu Cardenas, Acta Bot. Venez.
15(1): 87.
1987, non Rudd.
Characters as given in key to varieties; leaflets either pubemlent on both faces, or setose-strigulose on both faces, or glabrous except for cilia; pods (6-)7-12 mm wide, the valves either glabrous or densely pubemlent between setae.
On river banks, at edge of varzea forest, in seasonally wet savanna, and weedy in capoeira, mostly below 200 m, discontinuously scattered from the lower Magdalena valley in Colombia through the Orinoco and Amazon basins to French Guiana, in Brazil e. to Para and s. to Rondonia, w. into Amazonian Pem; Guatemala.—Ringuiringui (Ven).
Map 48.
318b. Mimosa schrankioides Bentham var. schrankioides.
M. schrankioides Bentham, 1846, I.e., sens, str.—"British Guiana, Schomburgk, 2nd CoU. n. 470 (765)."-Holotypus, Rob.
Schomburgk 470/765, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1786; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1372\ G! W! M. schrankioides sensu Bentham, 1875: 394, 1876: 312, in nota.
Characters as given in key to varieties; leaflets either pubemlent on both faces, then sometimes also strigose-setulose beneath, or glabrous except for cilia; pod not seen fuUy mature.
In unrecorded habitats, but to be expected in wet savanna or on flooded stream banks at low MAP 48.
Equatorial South America.
Range of M schrankioides Bentham. elevations, perhaps also weedy in disturbed places, known from few localities scattered around periphery of Guayana Highland in Guyana, Estado do Roraima in Brazil (where s. to the Equator), and along rio Orinoco in Bolivar, Venezuela; and somewhat disjunct (as presently appears) on rio Casanare in n.-e. Colombia and in the coastal serrania of n. Venezuela, in Carabobo and Aragua, there attaining 500 m.—Fl. season uncertain.
Map 48.
319.
Mimosa casta Linnaeus, Sp. pi. 518.1753.— ''Habitat in India."
—Lectotypus, proposed by Wijnands, The Botany of the Commelins 151.
1983: Herb, cliffort.
208.2, a sterile cultivated specimen, BM! M. dominiciana Desvaux, Ann. Sci. Nat. Bot. 1,9: 424.
1826. —"i/a^. in Dominica."
—Holotypus, communicated by Wm. Hamilton, not seen, but the protologue and locality decisive.—Equated with M. casta by Bentham, 1846: 85.
M. casta sensu Bentham, 1841: 364, 1875: 310, 1876: 393; Britton & Rose, 1928: 151; Britton & Killip, 1936: 150; Croat, Fl.
Barro Colorado Is. fig. 268.
1978; Cardenas, Acta Bot. Venez.
14(4): 95.
1985 [1987].
Prickly scrambling vines 2-4 m, procumbent when unsupported, armed on the obtuse cauline ribs and along the dorsal and lateral ribs of lfstks with files of recurved, broad-based, stramineous-tipped aculei 1-3.5 mm, otherwise either glabrous throughout, or the pinna-rachises and rarely the whole If finely minutely pubemlent, the ample thin-textured Ifts bicolored, dark green or (dry) brown above, paler beneath, sometimes thinly appressed-setose dorsally, finely subcontinuously ciliate with forwardly appressed setae, the smaU globose, shortly pedunculate capitula solitary or 2-3 together in If-axils, sometimes in praefloration forming a shortly exserted pseudoraceme but this hysteranthously foliate.
Stipules firm erect, lance-acuminate 2.5^.5 x 0.5-1.2 mm, (1-)2-3-nerved from base, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 4-10.5 cm, at middle 0.5-1 mm diam., the shallow open ventral sulcus bridged at apex and there charged (nearly always) with a spicule 0.6-1 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (2-)2.5-5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 5-12 mm; lfts (3-)4-5(-6)-jug., accrescent distally, the unequal first pair 4-13 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.7-1.5 mm, the blades either subfalcately lanceolate or obliquely elliptic or ovate-elliptic from deeply semicordate base, deltately acute or acuminulate, the distal ones 20- 36 X 5-16 mm, 2.2-4.5 times as long as wide, all faintly venose above, sharply so beneath, 5- 7-nerved from pulvinule, the gently incurved midrib dividing blade ±1:2, 4-6-branched on each side from below middle upward, the anterior nerve, when present, weak and short, the inner posterior one incurved-ascending beyond mid-blade, the outer ones progressively shorter, all expiring or weakly brochidodromous within the margin, the cilia ±0.01 mm diam., free through 0.3-1 mm.
Peduncles 6-20(-24) mm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the purplish, prominently 4-keeled fl-buds glabrous; receptacle glabrous; bracts linear-elliptic or -oblanceolate (1.2-)1.5- 2.5 X 0.1-0.25 mm, 1-nerved, glabrous or minutely ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, in some capitula all bisexual, in others some lower ones staminate; calyx membranous 0.15-0.25 mm, obscurely lobulate; corolla vase-shaped or the smaller ones narrowly turbinate, 1.7-2.6 mm, the ovate 1 -nerved, shallowly concave, scarcely thickened lobes 0.5-0.9 x 0.5-0.65 mm; filaments pink or whitish, free to base, exserted 4- 7 mm.
Pods 1-12 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile oblong obtuse mucronulate, straight or almost so, 20-40 x 10-14 mm, 3-5(-6)-seeded, the very shallowly constricted or straight replum 0.4-0.8 mm wide, armed along back and sides with divaricate straight stramineous, stiffly tapering setae to 2.5-4 mm, the papery brown glabrous, finely reticulate-venulose valves low-colliculate over each seed, naked or with a few small setulae, when ripe breaking up into free-falling indehiscent articles 5-8 mm long; seeds in broad profile obovate-suborbicular 4.6-5.3 x 3.5-4.3 mm, the smooth testa dull brown.
In thickets, climbing over hedges, and on lavaflows, below 200 m, apparently native on the Windward Is. and on Trinidad and Tobago, thence scattered s. and w. through the Orinoco valley in Venezuela and Colombia to the lower Magdalena valley in Colombia and the Canal Zone in Panama, and through French Guiana to the lower Amazon valley in Amapa and Para; one record from Amazonas, Brazil (Japura basin); locally frequent on Puerto Rico, but found there only in recent years and probably introduced, attaining 800 m.—Fl. irregularly through the year.—Paranovillo (Venezuela).
Map 47.
Mimosa casta is very closely related to M. schrankioides, especiaUy so to its var. sagotiana, which has similar calyx but leaflets one third to one half less numerous and to the same degree larger.
A modification in the opposite direction, culminating in leaflets reduced to exactly two pairs and these reciprocally dilated, would simulate M. velloziana, which may in reality have arisen in just this way.
Although these three species are so much alike in everything but leafformula, they appear not to intergrade; I have seen no doubtful or intermediate specimen.
In the protologue of M. casta Linnaeus cited his own previous descriptions in Hortus upsalensis and Hortus cliffortianus, and also Tabula 28 of the first volume of Jan Commelijn's Horti medici amstelodamensis.
This last depicts a plant grown at Amsterdam, from seed of unknown provenance, that died without producing flowers, but seems certainly the same as that grown in Cliffbrt's garden and the species known to Bentham as M. casta.
Mimosa no. 2 of Hortus cliffortianus was however a mixture of M. sensitiva (Breynius t. 16), as recognized in Species plantarum, and var. a which corresponds with Commelijn's plant.
In his early work Linnaeus cited M. casta (under polynomials) from Brazil, and his reason for changing this to India (which may mean the West Indies) is not readily explained.
In any event, by 1753 Linnaeus must have had another flowering plant which he mistook for M. casta, for in Species plantarum he described the flowers as dimorphic, some decandrous sterile, others decandrous bisexual.
The number ten is, of course, incompatible with M. casta, of which all flowers are tetramerous and haplostemonous.
I am unable to account for this discrepancy in the protologue, but if Wijnand's lectotypification (as given above) is accepted, the question is academic.
The application of the epithet casta is not explained.
It should perhaps be interpreted as cognate with sensitiva and pudica, the notions of shame, sensibility and chastity being somehow appUcable to these plants, of which the leaves shrink back in modesty when touched.
320.
Mimosa vexans Bameby, sp. nov., ut videtur M. schrankioidi arete affinis et calyce paleaceo ejus var. typicae proxima, sed ab ea ut ab omnibus subser. Castarum speciebus pinnis cujusque folii approximatim bijugis diversa.—Venezuela.
Yaracuy: 5.5 km n. of Salom [s. slope of the coastal cordiUera near 68°30'W], in secondary forest, 1000-1200 m, 4.
III. 1982 (fr), R. Liesner (with /.
Steyermark) 12335. -Holotypus, VEN 169661 = NY Neg. 12394.
Weakly fmtescent scrambling vine attaining 2.5 m, the stems and both dorsal and lateral ribs of lf-axes densely serially armed with recurved stramineous acidei to 1.5-2.5 mm and also hispid with fine spreading sordid setae about as long, the foliage green, the thin-textured lfts finely pilosulous ventrally, appressed-setose-strigose dorsally, discontinuously setose-ciliate, the globose capitula (so far as known) axillary to distal lvs.
Stipules linear-setiform 3-6 x 0.3-0.5 mm, becoming dry deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 6-9 cm, the petiole 5.5-8.5 cm, at middle 0.7-1.2 mm diam., the one interpinnal segment 5-12 mm; spicules apparently 0; pinnae 2-jug., the rachis of longer ones 3.5-7 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2.5-4.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 15-19-jug., the first pair 1.5-4 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia to 1.5 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from asymmetrically rounded base, abmptly acuminulate at apex, the longer ones ±10-17 x 3-4 mm, 3.3-4.5 times as long as wide, all weakly 3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric, simple or faintly branched, the inner posterior nerve scarcely attaining mid-blade, the outer one short and weak.
Peduncles (solitary so far as seen but very likely paired or fasciculate when young) in fmit 20-24 mm; capitula (not seen at anthesis) without filaments probably ±5.5 mm diam., the receptacle ±2 x 1.5 mm, thinly setose; bracts linear, to 2 x 0.4 mm; capitula (not seen at anthesis) without filaments probably ±5.5 mm diam., the receptacle ±2 x 1.5 mm, thinly setose; bracts linear, to 2 x 0.4 mm, glabrous dorsally, 1-nerved, setose-ciliate above middle; flowers 4-merous, glabrous; calyx paleaceouspappiform ±1.2 mm, the tube ±0.4 mm, the lobes deeply dissected; corolla ±2.3 mm, the cymbiform, dorsally keeled lobes ±0.7 x 0.5 mm; androecium not seen.
Pods 1-10 per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong 15-25 X 6-7 mm, abmptly cuspidate at apex, the almost straight replum ±0.4 mm wide, together with papery stramineous valves densely hispid overall with slender erect straight tapering setae to ±2-4 mm, the valves breaking up into almost square articles 5-6 mm long. In secondary forest at 1000-1200 m, known only from the type-locality, at 10°15'N, 68°29'W in the state of Yaracuy, n.-centr. Venezuela.— Fr.
III. The mimosa described above is as vexatious from a purely tactile as from a systematic viewpoint.
In habit, in armature, in flower and in fruit it closely resembles M. schrankioides var. schrankioides, but it differs from this species, and from all other Castae, in having two pairs of pinnae per leaf, the lower pair arising shortly below the terminal pair but not contiguously.
The plant could be interpreted as a variety of M schrankioides with anomalous foliage, but the question of its rank must be deferred until more can be learned about possible variation in leafformula.
The late Dr. Julian Steyermark observed (pers. comm.) that the type-locality is in a region rich in local endemism.
E(ii.4).
Series MIMOSA subseries TELEDACTYLAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Teledactylae Bameby, subser. nov., habitu subsarmentoso, caulibus petiolisque seriatim retro-aculeatis ac leguminis forma omnino cum subser. Castis congma, sed pinnis 3-5-jugis (nec conjugatis) inter se secus rachin elongatam semotis eximie diversa.—Sp. typica (unica): M. teledactyla DonneU Smith.—M. VI. Teledactylae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 145, in clave.
1928.
In diffuse-sarmentose growth-form and armature of serial cat's-claw prickles resembling subser. Castae, but pinnae 3-5-jug. (not conjugate) and the pairs well spaced along a rachis much longer than the petiole; stipules 1-nerved; lfts 8-15-jug., to 7-14 mm, mostly 2-nerved; capitula axillary to coeval or immediately hysteranthous lvs, globose, the flowers and pods of subser. Castae.
Sp.
1, of moist montane woodland and cloud forest in far s. Mexico (Chiapas) and w. Central America (Guatemala, Honduras).
The single species of subser. Teledactylae resembles M. casta in habit, armament and craspedium, but differs gravely in leaf-formula.
Species of subser. Pudicae may have reduplicated pinnae like M. teledactyla, but these are bome close together toward the tip of the leaf-stalk on a rachis much shorter than the petiole.
The distantly allopatric M. williamsii, which is comparable to M. teledactyla in habit, serial prickles and leaf-formula, has a strong spicule between each pair of pinnae and is conjectured to have arisen in somewhat parallel fashion from subser. Polycarpae.
In Central America M. teledactyla is morphologically isolated, and differs from the lowland weedy Pudicae and Castae by its montane habitat.
321.
Mimosa teledactyla Donnell Smith, Bot. Gaz. (Crawfordsville) 56: 57.
1913.-"Santa Rosa, Depart.
Baja Verapaz, Guatemala, [28] Maj.
1904, O. F. Cook n. 2i^."-Holotypus, US 8600861; clastotypus + photo, NY! M. hadrocarpa A. Molina, Ceiba 1:256.1951.—"Honduras. ... Rancho Quemado, sudoeste de San Juancito, Dept. de Morazan, alt. 2000 m, junio 19, 1948, Molina 1039a ... Montana La Tigra, sudoeste de San Juancito, Dept. de Morazan, alt. 2000 m, febrero 5, 1950, Williams & Molina 17092 .. . vicinity of La Esperanza and Intibuca, Dept. de Intibuca . .. Standley 26^6^."—Lectotypus, Williams & Molina 17092 = US 22160141; isotypus, F!; syntypus, Standley 26464, F! M. teledactyla sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 172.
Diffiise or scrambling prickly vines attaining 7-20 dm, armed on intemodes and lf-stks with serial cat's-claw aculei and hispid with straight erect tawny setae 0.6-2(-5) mm, the facially glabrous lfts bicolored, discontinuously appressedsetose-ciliate.
Stipules Unear-attenuate 1 -nerved.
Leaf-formula iii-v/(8-)9-14(-15), the lf-stk of longer lvs 5-17 cm, the petiole 3-8 cm, the interpinnal segments l-2(-2.5) cm, the ventral sulcus either continuous or bridged but spicules 0; lfts Unear-oblong obtuse, the longer ones 7-14 X 1.8-3 mm, weakly 2(-3)-nerved dorsally, the midrib centric beyond mid-blade, the posterior nerve very short.
Capitula solitary or geminate in If-axils and much surpassed by subtending If, globose moriform; calyx campanulate denticulate 0.5-0.75 mm, the rim minutely setuloseciliolate; corolla 2.3-2.8 mm, glabrous, the lobes slenderly carinate extemally.
Pods mostly 2-10 per capitulum, sessile or nearly so, in profile narrowly oblong cuspidate (15-)20-30 x 6-8 mm, (2-)3-4-seeded, the replum ±0.6-0.9 mm diam., armed with pluriseriate, stiffly erect setae to 4- 5.5 mm, the papery valves usually hispid with more slender setae, these sometimes lacking, the free-falling articles 5.5-7 mm long. Leaning and climbing in damp thickets and openings in cloud forest, 1400-2000 m, of local dispersal in mountainous s. Mexico (Chiapas, mun. Jitotol), s.-e. Guatemala (Sta. Rosa), and Honduras (Intibuca, Comayagua, Morazan, La Paz).—Fl.
X-ll.—Dormilona (Honduras).
The type of M. teledactyla is an immature specimen, remarkable for very long (to 5 mm) cauline setae and relatively coarse cilia of leaflets, of the species subsequently described from mature material as M. hadrocarpa.
E(ii.5).
Series MIMOSA subseries MIMOSA Mimosa Linnaeus sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Mimosa.
M. sect. Eumimosa § Sensitivae DeCandolle, Prod.
2: 359.
1842.
M. ser. Sensitivae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 359.
1842.
M. I. Sensitivae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. n .
23(3): 144, in clave.
1928.-Sp. typica: M. sensitiva Linnaeus.
M. ser. Sensitivae sensu Bentham, 1875: 390; 1876: 304; Burkart, Bol. Soc. Argent.
Bot. 1(1): 36^3.
1945; Rudd, Phytologia 16: 435-441.
1968; R. Grether, Phytologia 52: 81-92.
1982.
Macrophyllidious subshrubs (some functionally herbaceous), weak shrubs, subarborescent shrubs, and soft-woody vines, variably armed on stems or lf-stks (or both) with ± recurved aculei. or some unarmed, and variably setose and pubemlent or glabrous, the inflorescence of axillary or pseudoracemose globose capitula; stems sometimes laticiferous, but prevalence of latex scarcely known; stipules mostly 3-11-nerved, in two rare Mexican spp. 1-nerved or nerveless; petioles (0.6-)1-11 cm, either spiculate or not; lfts 2-jug., the anterior member of proximal pair much reduced in size or sometimes suppressed, each pinna then becoming 3-foliolate, the distal pair of lfts (1-)2-10 cm, 3-7-nerved from pulvinule, often reticulately venulose, all lfts either continuously or discontinuously setose-marginate or sometimes smoothly callous-marginate; calyx either minute (0.15-0.4 mm) and its orifice either glabrous or microscopicaUy ciliolate, or in 2 spp. (M. sensitiva, M. sousae) pappiform and to 1.6(-2) mm; filaments free or almost so; fruit a sessile or stipitate, 2-5(-6)-seeded craspedium.
Spp. 9, the majority of wide range and dismayingly polymorphic, dispersed over much of lowland and submontane N. and S. America, but absent from the West Indies, most diverse and numerous to the n. and s. of Amazonia, especially in Pacific s. Mexico and in Paraguay and adj. countries, only there marginally extratropical.
Because of their strikingly simplified and stable leaf-formula (i/2, or when the small anterior leaflet of the proximal pair is suppressed i/1.5), the members of subser. Mimosa have from early times been recognized at some level as a taxonomic group.
This may, however, not be a monophyletic one.
The same leaf-formula is encountered in all adult leaves of the monocarpic M. (subser. Affines) tequilana and in some, or in a variety in all, leaves of M. (subser. Lactifluae) goldmanii, the affinities of which, to plurifoliolate M. affinis and M. psilocarpa, respectively, can hardly be challenged.
It is possible, therefore, that the reduction of leaflet-number may have occurred more often than is yet realized.
While M. velloziana of this subseries appears in everything but leaflet-number as close to M. (subser. Castae) casta as to any other of the so-caUed Sensitivae, the rare Mexican M. acapulcensis is suggestively similar to the core of subser. Lactifluae, an assemblage compatible with it in habit, ecology, and dispersal.
Furthermore there are unsettling similarities in some foliage characters between M. (subser. Mimosa) nuda and some compatriot forms of M. (subser. Dolentes) dolens.
Until a litmus test is developed that can distinguish between genetic affinity and morphological parallelism, the historic concept of '^Sensitivae"^—the familiar epithet now discarded as superfluous—is, however, bound to remain a serviceable one.
I have placed subser. Mimosa within a consortium of spiculate groups in the full awareness that a spicule is far from universal through the group.
Interpinnal spicules are almost always present in M. sensitiva and M. sensibilis, often present in M. velloziana, usually lacking in M. debilis (except its var. amnis-mortium), only exceptionally present in M. albida and, so far as observed, lacking in M. nuda, M. acapulcensis, and M. sousae.
I hypothesize that it is the more advanced species in which the spicule is suppressed.
While the definition of subser. Mimosa by leafformula is, with small exceptionsjust noted, easy enough, that of its component species has traditionaUy been qiute the reverse.
Bentham (1875: 390) alluded to the seeming confluence ofhis first six species, and the thirteen that he maintained were defined principally in terms of armament, indumentum, and leaflet-outline.
These are extremely labile characters.
The prickles, setae, setaculei and villi seem to come and go from stem, leaf and pod with unexampled freedom, and are subject to random, mutually independent variation in density and dispersal over the plant, and in orientation, length and color.
The leaflets vary in outline from linear or lanceolate through elliptic to broadly ovate or obovate, and may be either rounded, or deltately acute, or acuminate at apex.
The pods vary between populations very substantially in length and even further in relative or absolute width.
Study of the copious material of subser. Mimosa now available in modem herbaria shows that Bentham's taxa were based on a randomly selected fraction of the combinations, known or theoretically predictable, ofindependently variable characters, which only seldom and locally have acquired some measure of stability.
Several schemes of classification are possible, depending on subjective evaluation of each character as an indicator of affinity and of the hierarchical value attached to it.
Revisions of the Sensitivae native in and near northem Argentina by Burkart (1945, 1948) and of M albida by Rudd (1968, comprehensive) and R. Grether (1982, for Mexico) have extended Bentham's classification, without challenge to its basic principles, and have evaded the central problems of the subseries, problems that are encountered with greatest urgency in central and eastem BrazU, Paraguay, and eastem BoUvia.
In discussion following the protologue of M. parapitiensis Burkart (1945: 38) estimated the number of Sensitivae at twenty-five species.
By contrast I here recognize, not without misgiving, a total of nine taxonomically defensible specific complexes in aU: in South America six (Mm. sensitiva, velloziana, sensibilis, debilis, albida and nuda, with a seventh, the imperfectly known M. platyphylla, held in abeyance for further information); and in North America five: widespread M. albida, M. debilis feebly extending north to Costa Rica, M. velloziana, suspected (McVaugh, 1987: 203) of having immigrated only recently into Nueva Galicia, and the highly differentiated, narrowly endemic M. acapulcensis and M. sousae.
An origin for the last two from M. caerulea and M. deamii respectively or immediate ancestors by independent but parallel simplification of leaf-formula is tentatively suggested.
A serious deficiency of this account of subser. Mimosa is the absence of M. albida var. pochutlensis R. Grether (1982: 91, fig. 1), of which I have seen only flowering material.
While this appears to me inseparable from M. albida sensu lato, the fmit is described as hispidly setose, not strigose, a character crucial in separation of M. albida from M. debilis.
Here rises anew the specter of a huge complex artificiaUy divided by means of one labile character.
Conspectus of subser. Mimosa) Mimosa * Stems and lf-stks serially armed with cat's-claw aculei.
322. sensitiva L. a. var. sensitiva b. var. malitiosa (Martius) Bameby 323. velloziana Martius ** Stems and lf-stks armed with scattered intemodal aculei.
324. albida Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow a. var. albida h. var. glabrior B. L. Robinson c. var. willdenowii (Poiret) Rudd 325. sensibilis Grisebach a. var. sensibilis h. var. urucumensis Bameby c. var. aquidabani Bameby 326. debilis Humboldt & Bonpland a. var. debilis b. var. aequatoriana (Rudd) Bameby c. var. parapitiensis (Burkart) Bameby d. var. vestita (Bentham) Bameby e. var. amnis-mortium Bameby 327. platyphylla Bentham 328. niuia Bentham a. var. glaberrima (Chodat & Hassler) Bameby b. var. gracilipes (Harms) Bameby c. var. ramosa (Bentham) Bameby d. var. angusta (Bentham) Bameby e. var. nuda 329. acapulcensis B. L. Robinson 330. sousae R. Grether Not accounted for: M. albida var. pochutlensis R. Grether.
Key to species of subser. Mimosa, omitting the scarcely known 327.
M. platyphylla 1.
Of North America.
2.
Fmtescent or subarborescent, seldom less than 1 m tall; capitula many-fld, globose, the fls radiating from the receptacle.
3.
Peduncles from brachyblasts lateral to annotinous branches; lfts 2-3-jug. per pinna, seldom all 2-jug; cf M. goldmanii in subser. Lactifluae (p. 574).
3.
Peduncles axillary to coeval lvs of homotinous branches or terminally pseudoracemose.
4.
Lfts girdled with a continuous, ecUiate, callous marginal nerve; pod smooth glabrous esetose; coastal Guerrero, Mexico 329.
M. acapulcensis (p. 558).
4.
Lfts either continuously marginate or not, but in any case antrorsely setose-ciliate; pods variably pubescent, exceptionaUy subglabrous.
5.
Small erect shrubs of coastal Oaxaca (Salina Cmz), the stems and stiff broad lfts pallidly strigose overall with ascending scabemlous setae, the caUous margin continuous; pods at once stipitate and 9-13 mm wide, densely hispid overall with scaberulous setae 2-3 mm.
330.
M. sousae (p. 559).
5.
Herbs and shmbs of wide dispersal, if strigose-hispidulous overaU the setae smooth and the Ift-margin discontinuous; pods mostly sessile or almost so, variably pubescent or glabrous facially and strigose or setose on replum, but if the body as wide as the preceding then the setae smooth.
6.
Stems and lf-stks serially aculeate; pod 8-11 mm wide, hispid-setose on replum.
323. ^. velloziana (p. 538).
6.
Stems either unarmed or armed between successive nodes with onl^f 1-3 subnodal or infranodal aculei, if aculei (exceptionally) more numerous on intemodes then the pod less than 8 mm wide, or merely strigose on replum, or both.
7.
Pod hispid on replum with erect and divaricate setae; lfts tending to be broadest above middle (obliquely obovate or oblanceolate); Costa Rica and Panama, and thence widespread s.-ward in S. America 326.
M. debilis (p. 546).
7.
Pod scabrous or scaberulous on replum with forwardly appressed or subappressed setae, these variable in length and density; lfts tending to be broadest at or below mid-blade (semi-ovate or falcately elliptic); very common from tropical Mexico s.- ward 324.
M. albida (p. 541).
2.
Diffiise monocarpic herbs 2—4 dm, local in Jalisco and Nayarit, Mexico; capitula less than 25-fld, without filaments 2.5-4 mm diam., the fls aU ascending; cf M. tequilana in subser. Aflines (p. 651).
1.
Of South America.
8.
Calyx minute, glabrous or microscopically ciliolate with weak villi or setulae not over 0.3 mm.
9.
Stems and lf-stks equally armed with close files of recurved aculei; pod 8-13 mm wide, usually armed on replum and commonly so on valves with long erect-spreading setae; distal lfts obliquely lanceolate or ovate-elliptic, broadest near or below middle; widespread, weedy 323.
M. velloziana (p. 538).
9.
Stems and lf-stks either armed or not, but aculei when present relatively few and scattered, 1-4 (exceptionally more) per petiole; pods and lvs various.
10.
Shrubs of e. Bolivia and of adj. Argentina, Paraguay and Brazil, with usually glabrous (in var. urucumensis puberulent) corolla and the secondary venation of lfts camptodrome within the margin; pods 6-10 mm wide 325.
M. sensibilis (p. 545).
10.
Subshrubs and herbs widespread from Argentina n.-ward, with corollas either glabrous or puberulent, but when glabrous combined with secondary nerves of lfts confluent with marginal nerve, and pods 3-5(-5.5) mm wide.
11.
Lobes of corolla puberulent; secondary nerves of lfts either expiring or camptodrome within the discontinuously corneous margin, or (rarely) very tenuously or obscurely anastomosing with it.
12.
Pods strigose, the setae of replum less than 0.5 mm and forwardly subappressed; terminal lfts of each pinna mostly broadest at or below middle, in outline obliquely lanceolate or ovate-acuminate; mostly Andean, n.-ward from Bolivia and adj. lowland Brazil, to n. Venezuela and n.-ward 324.
M. albida (p. 541).
12.
Pods hispid, the setae of replum more than 1 mm and erect; terminal lfts of each pinna usually broadest above mid-blade, in outline obliquely oblanceolate or obovate; savannas, thickets and disturbed brush-woodlands over much of tropical S. America e. of the Andes, and one var. disjunct in lowland Pacific Ecuador, this with lfts of M albida 326.
M. debilis (p. 546).
11.
Lobes of coroUa glabrous; secondary nerves of lfts produced to anastomosis with the continuous corneous marginal nerve; herbs and subshmbs from xylopodium or napiform roots, of campo and cerrado habitats, Brazilian Planalto s. to n.-e. Argentina, w. through Paraguay to e. Bolivia 328.
M. nuda (p. 553).
8.
Calyx pappiform 0.7-1.6 mm, irregularly cleft to within 0.1-0.4 mm of base into pallid-stramineous setae; stems and lf-stks armed with close files of cat's-claw aculei 322.
M. sensitiva (p. 537).
322.
Mimosa sensitiva Linnaeus, Sp. pi. 518.
1753.—Typus infra sub var. sensitiva indicatur.
Diffuse, scrambling or scandent, vinelike softwoody shrubs, densely armed on subterete but several-ribbed stems and on lateral and dorsal ribs of lf-stks with files of sharp recurved, stramineous or bronze-tipped aculei to 1-3 mm nearly always mixed with retrorse yellowish setaculei, in addition finely villosulous throughout except for often glabrous upper face of lfts and charged on lower face of lfts with scattered appressed setae to 0.8-1.6 mm, the olivaceous lvs subconcolorous or a little paler beneath, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula mostly solitary or paired in If-axils, some later ones pseudoracemose and shortly exserted from foliage.
Stipules ovate or lanceolate 2-5(-8) x 0.8-2 mm, sharply 3-nerved, dorsally villosulous and sometimes also setulose, setose-ciliate, becoming dry but persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-6.5(-9) cm, at middle 0.4-1.1 mm diam., the ventral groove open and shallowly or scarcely depressed, often but not invariably spiculate at tip; pinnae 1-jug., the axis of each (5-)8-16(-21) mm, bearing the first of 2 pairs of lfts near or below middle, the anterior 1ft of this pair ovate-acuminate and much smaller than the rest; paraphyllidia lance-subulate 1-3.5 X 0.2-0.4 mm, strongly 1-nerved; lfts of distal pair dimidiately ovate or obliquely lanceelliptic to falcately lanceolate from semicordate base, 25-60 x (9-)10-20 mm, 2-3.3 times as long as wide, at apex deltateor triangular-mucronate or rarely obtuse apiculate, the thin-textured blades margined with a single continuous file of slender, forwardly appressed setae free through 0.4-1 mm, 3-5(-6)-nerved from setulose pulvinule, the secondary nerves from midrib incurved-ascending and either weakly brochidodrome or sometimes expiring just short of margin, these and the sometimes obscure tertiary venulation sharply prominulous and pallid beneath, prominulous but not discolored above.
Peduncles l-3(-3.5) cm, either aculeate or unarmed; capitula without filaments 5-9.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis either conelike or moriform; bracts linear or linear-oblanceolate, often (see key to vars.) setose-appendaged; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, a few lower ones smaller and staminate; calyx pappiform 0.7-1.6 mm, the tube 0.1-0.4 mm deep, ciUate with unequal pallid-stramineous paleaceous setae; corolla narrowly funnelform or subtubular 2.2-3 mm, 4-ribbed from base, the ovate acute, apically incurved but only a little thickened lobes 0.45-0.6 X 0.3-0.5 mm, either glabrous or pubemlent extemally, minutely ciliolate; filaments essentially free to base, pale pink or lilac-purple, exserted 5.5-7.5 mm.
Pods (Lewis, 1987, fig. 9S) several or many per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong or oblong-elUptic, rounded at each end but apically apiculate by a subulate beak 1-2.5 mm, when well fertilized 13-23 x 4-7 mm, the replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, armed on dorsal and lateral ribs with stout straight erect, pallid or violaceous setae to 2.5-5 mm and commonly also minutely pubemlent, the thin green, when ripe stramineous or brown, papery valves lowcolliculate over each seed and also at least thinly setose, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into 2-4(-5) indehiscent, free-falling articles 3.5-7 mm long; seeds olivaceous or fuscous-olivaceous 3-4 X 2-3.2 mm, the testa sublustrous.
Mimosa sensitiva is the common member of subser. Mimosa throughout northeastern Brazil, and readily known by the paleaceous-pappiform calyx, brochidodrome venulation of the relatively bright green leaflets, and northward from southem Bahia notable for the spinulose-marginate bracts that form a cancellately interlocking involucre around the flower-buds.
Toward its southem limit in Bahia and Minas Gerais the species is, however, represented by the var. malitiosa, in which the bracts are much reduced in length and are almost or quite unappendaged, therefore exposing the flower-buds.
This var. malitiosa suggests passage into the closely related M. velloziana, which has similar bracts but is nevertheless distinguished by a minute, naked or vestigially ciliolate calyx which coincides with a broader pod.
While the faces of the pod of M. sensitiva are most often villosulous as well as setose and those of M. velloziana are ordinarily glabrous, this character is not as reliable as the literature would suggest.
Mimosa sensitiva, the type of its genus, was cultivated in northem Europe in the second half of the XVII century, very likely introduced from Pemambuco by Marcgrave or Piso.
Its abmpt leaf-movements made it an object of wonder at that time, but as an exemplary sensitive it was soon replaced by the more easily grown and precociously flowering M. pudica.
Key to varieties of Af. sensitiva 1.
Interfloral bracts 2-4 mm, in outline spatulate, their margin at and beyond middle cleft to within 0.2-0.4 mm of midrib into widely ascending paleaceous setae 1-4 mm; capitula without filaments 6-8(-9) mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike, the fl-buds concealed by an involucre of interlaced setae; coastal and upland Bahia, Brazil n.-ward through the middle and lower Amazon basin to the Orinoco valley and Cord.
Maritima in Venezuela; one collection from Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil (? native) 322a. var. sensitiva (p. 538).
1.
Interfloral bracts 0.8-1.5 mm, in outline linearoblanceolate, their margin entire or minutely ciliolate or cleft into setiform teeth less than 0.3 mm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam., moriform prior to anthesis, the fl-buds as long as or longer than bracts; local in middle S. Francisco valley in s.-w. Bahia and adj. Minas Gerais, thence s. along the mts. to ±22°S (Caldas); one record from the Pardo valley in far s.-e. Bahia.
322b. var. malitiosa (p. 538).
322a. Mimosa sensitiva Linnaeus var. sensitiva.
M. sensitiva Linnaeus, 1753, I.e., sens, str.— "Habitat in Brasilia."
—Based exclusively on Mimosa [in text Aeschynomene] spinosa prima seu brasiliana latifolia siliquis radiatis Breyne, Exot. pi. cent. 1: 31, t. 16.
1678, this meticulous description and lifelike figure providing the holotypus! M. litigiosa Martius, Flora 21(2, Beibl.
4): 58 [=Herb. fl. bras. 138].
1838.—". .. in sepibus ad Soteropolin [Salvador, Bahia], prope Para et prope Ega in prov. Rio Negro."
—Lectotypus, Martius s.n.,
"in sylvis prope Para," M (ticket 389)\; isotypus, K! = NY Neg. 1771; syntypus, Martius s.n.,
"ad Ega," M (ticket 387)\—The syntypi Martius s.n.,
"ad Soteropolin," M (ticket 386)\ and "ad Para" M (Ucket 388) = M. velloziana. —Equated with M. sensitiva by Bentham, 1875: 390.
M. sensitiva sensu Bentham, 1875: 390, 1876: 305, max. ex parte, exclus. syn. M. malitiosa.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In seasonally dry woodland, thickets, savanna bush-islands, and coastal restinga, becoming weedy in capoeira and along roadsides, in Brazil from near sea-level to 1000 m in Chapada Diamantina (Bahia), intermptedly widespread over e. Brazil from centr. upland and Atlantic coastal Bahia to the middle and lower Amazon Basin, thence n. to the Orinoco Basin and the Caribbean slope in Zulia, Yaracuy and Carabobo in Venezuela; one Brazilian record from Mato Grosso do Sul (mun. Aquidauana, perhaps adventive in cattle land) and one from s.-centr. Minas Gerais (Ouro Preto).— ¥1. primarily XII-IV, but randomly at other seasons.—Lambe-beigo (Bahia).
Map 49.
322b. Mimosa sensitiva Linnaeus var. malitiosa (Martius) Bameby, Brittonia 37: 153.
1985.
M. malitiosa Martius, Rora 21(2, Beibl.
4: 58 [=Herb. fl. bras. 138].
1838.-"In sepibus camporum Prov. Minas Geraes."
—Lectotypus (Bameby, I.e.), Martius 1079, from Ouro Preto, Minas Gerais, M (ticket 1706)\; isotypi, BM! G! GH! K! = NY Neg. 1772, M (ticket 396)\ MO!—Equated with M. sensitiva by Bentham, 1875: 390.
M. malitiosa sensu Bentham, 1841: 360.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In disturbed bmsh-woodland, in roadside thickets or hedges, and in fallow fields, ±300- 550 m, locally common in the middle S. Francisco basin in s.-w. Bahia and adj. Minas Gerais, thence s. intermptedly along Sa. do Espinha90 to extreme s. Minas Gerais (Caldas); one record from basin of rio Pardo in s.-e. Bahia (mun. Po- 96es).-H. I-IV(-?).
Map 49.
323.
Mimosa velloziana Martius, Flora 22(1, Beibl.
1): 9 [= Herb. fl. bras. 185].
1839, based on M. viva Vellozo, Fl. flumin. icon.
11: t. 33.
1829, nom. illeg., non Linnaeus, 1753.—Typus, the cited plate! M. heterocarpa K. Presl, Abh.
Konigl.
Bohm.
Ges.
Wiss.
V, 3: 494.
1845 [Bot. Bemerk.
64.
1844 [1846]].—"Habitat in Brasilia ad Rio de Janeiro."
- Holotypus, Lhotsky s.n.,
PR!; isotypus, G!—Mischaracterized by pinnis quadrijugis, the pinnae in reality 1 pair and lfts of each pinna 2 pairs, i.e., each pinna 4-foliolate.
MAP 49.
Tropical South America.
Range of M. sensitiva Linnaeus.
M. jiramenensis Karsten, Fl.
Columb.
2: 59, t. 130.
1863.—"... ad litora fluminis Metae . .. prope Jiramene et Villavicencio."
—Presumed holotypus, Karsten s.n.,
W!—Af. velloziana var. jiramenensis (Karsten) Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 330: 390.
1875. (?) M. velloziana var. glabra Wawra, Flora 47: 228.
1864.-"Peckoh CoU. n. 244."-No typus found at W, where this species is represented by a specimen collected by Wawra at "Lima" in April 1868.
M. maxonii Standley, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 17(5): 432.
1914.-"Type [US] no. 473478, collected m the vicinity of Mazatenango, Guatemala .
.
. about 350 meters, Febmary 20, 1905, by William R. Maxon and Robert Hay."
—Holotypus, US!; clastotypus + photo, NY! M. velloziana var. oranensis Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 208.
1948.—"Argentina.
Prov. de Salta, Dep.
Oran: Rio Pescado .
.
.
Teodoro Meyer 4770, 28-11- 1943 " Holotypus, LIL 91294, not seen; paratypi, O'DonneU3121, 3125, Pierotti 66, A. G. Schulz 5515, aU NY! M. velloziana sensu Bentham, 1841: 390 (^''Vellosiana"), 1875: 390, 1876: 304, t. 80; B. L. Robinson, 1898:309; Burkart, 1948:207; McVaugh, 1987:203; Lewis, 1987, fig. 9T. Diffusely arching and scrambling, vineor briar-like, subherbaceous and softly woody shrubs with prickly canes potentially attaining 2.5 m in length and 9 mm diam., the terete or ribbed (but not 4-angular) homotinous stems together with dorsal rib of petioles armed with files of sharp, stramineous brown-tipped, broad-based recurved aculei to 1.5-3.5(-4) mm with or without slender retrorse setaculei and fine erect pallid villi to 0.3-0.5 mm, the broad papery lfts bicolored, green or purplishto brownish-tinged and glabrous above, beneath olivaceous and commonly thinly strigose and sometimes in addition finely pilosulous, less often quite glabrous, the globose capitula commonly axillary to contemporary lvs or some later ones forming a simple or paniculately forking pseudoraceme exserted 1-3 dm from foliage.
Stipules oblong or lance-ovate obtuse, erose or abmptly apiculate 3-6 x (0.8-)l- 2.4 mm, the prominently 3-several-nerved blades becoming dry but persistent.
Leaf-stalks (disregarding obviously diminished distal Ivs) 2.5-7(- 8) cm, at middle 0.5-1.4 mm diam., the ventral groove broad and open, scarcely depressed below level of delimiting petiolar ribs, the spicule small or lacking; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of each including livid wrinkled hispidulous pulvinus (8-) 10-22 mm, the proximal pair of lfts below or near middle and its anterior small 1ft subsymmetrically ovate-acuminate; paraphyllidia subulate or narrowly lanceolate 0.5-2.5 x 0.25-0.6 mm; blades of distal pair of lfts very obliquely or dimidiately lance-ovate or -elliptic, the larger ones (2.5-)3-6.5 x i-3(-3.2) cm, ±2-3 times as long as wide, at base cordate on proximal side and cuneate on distal one, at apex deltate, triangular or short-acuminate, the margin with a single file of forwardly subappressed corneous setae free for 0.6-1 mm; primary venation of blades consisting of 4-6 nerves radiating from broad hispidulous pulvinule, the midrib asymmetric, forwardly incurved, the secondary venules from this and from posterior nerves incurved-ascending and weakly brochidodrome or sometimes expiring short of Ift-margin, all these and fine, openly reticulate tertiary venules prominulous beneath, immersed but sometimes discolored above.
Peduncles commonly 2-3 per node but some early ones solitary, 6-17(-22) mm; capitula globose, without filaments 5-6 mm diam.; bracts Unear-lanceolate 1-2.6 x 0.3-0.6 mm, carinate dorsally, the membranous margins either smooth or with few pallid setulae to 0.3 (-0.4) mm; fl-buds obovoid, glabrous or apicaUy pubemlent;yZoM^^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, usually bisexual but some proximal ones often a little smaller and proportionately wider than the rest; calyx membranous 0.25-0.4 mm, the rim glabrous or minutely ciUolate; corolla narrowly funnelform 1.9-2.7 mm, 4-costate from base upward, the ovate-apiculate, apically incurved and slightly callous lobes 0.55-0.7 x 0.4-0.55 mm; filaments lilac or pink, sometimes fading whitish, free to base, exserted 3.5-5.5 mm; ovary an anthesis glabrous.
Pods usually numerous per capitulum, sessile or abmptly contracted at base into a stipe to 1-1.5 mm, the piano-compressed body in profile narrowly oblong or broad-linear, whenweUfertilized(16-)20-42 x 8-ll(-13)mm, (1-)2-5-seeded, the replum in dorsal view 0.45- 0.8 mm wide, at apex contracted into a slender beak 0.5-2 mm, its whole length armed on both dorsal and lateral ribs with stout erect setae 1-5 mm and rarely also minutely pubemlent, the thin, green or anthocyanic, glabrous or pubemlent valves when ripe stramineous, brownish or castaneous, low-colliculate and commonly setose (rarely esetose) over each seed, ultimately separating from replum and breaking up into articles 5.5-10 mm long; seeds compressed-obovoid 4- 5.5 X 3-4.3 mm, the testa brown or olivaceous duU.
A weedy opportunistic mimosa, in open places forming diffuse tangles of prickly stems but potentially sarmentose through shmbs and small trees, of dubious nativity, now intermptedly widespread, from the lowlands to ±850 m in Mexico and to 1100 m on the Brazilian Planalto, in tropical N. and both tropical and warm temperate S. America, excluding the Antilles and Pacific S. America: s. Mexico (Nayarit, perhaps only adventive, not mapped; Oaxaca, Veracmz, Tabasco, Chiapas) s. to Panama; trans-Andean Colombia and Venezuela (Maracaibo and Orinoco basins); apparently not in the Guianas; Brazil from Para s. to Parana, erratically w. to middle Amazonia, to s.-centr. Goias, and to the Paraguai valley in Mato Grosso; seemingly disjunct in the lower Parana valley in Argentina (Misiones, Corrientes) and in the Andean foothiUs of Bolivia (Tarija) and Argentina (Salta); collected once at Lima, Pem, presumably introduced. —R. irregularly through the year.
Map 50.
Mimosa velloziana closely resembles M. sensitiva in habit, in armature of stems and leafstalks, and in shape of leaflets, but differs in a minute, non-pappiform calyx combined with a pod ordinarily 8 or more, not 4-7, mm wide.
Populations differ in pubescence of foliage, in length and density of setae, and pubemlence of the pod's valves; and the pod itself, like that of M. casta, a species very similar except for a few more pairs of leaflets, varies considerably in MAP 50.
Parts of Mexico, Central America, and South America.
Range of M. velloziana Martius (recent records from s.-w. Mexico omitted). width.
But no correlated modes of variation are apparent in the main east-Brazilian range of the species.
It is surmised that M. velloziana, like M. sensitiva, was originally native to eastem Brazil, south of Amazonia, and has spread outward from the present focus of abundance, very likely travelling with livestock, the hispid pod being well adapted to such transport.
The relatively small samples examined from the two major populations in Argentina, on the lower Parana river and in the Andean foothills of Salta respectively, confirm Burkart's discovery of different pubescence patterns in these two disjunct regions.
If, however, each derives from an independent introduction from Brazil, as seems plausible, it would not be surprising to find that slightly different genomes, fortuitously introduced, continue to reproduce their kind, presenting a locally uniform phenotype.
Both Martius and Bentham assumed that the M. viva portrayed by Vellozo was the plant common, at least formerly, within and around the city of Rio de Janeiro, where it was collected by most of the early botanists in Brazil, and there is no reason to question this.
Mimosa heterocarpa, collected by Lhotzky either in coastal Bahia or in Guanabara in the early 1830's, attained a spurious distinctness by faulty description of the pinnae as being four pairs per leaf, when in fact each is merely four-foliolate.
Mimosa flramenensis, maintained by Bentham as a variety, exemplifies the broad extreme in fmit measurement, but seems no more than this.
Mimosa maxonii represents a relatively uncommon variant with pod-valves densely pubemlent.
324.
Mimosa albida Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1030.
1806.-Typus infra sub var. albida indicatur.
Diffuse, potentially fmtescent herbs, bushy shrubs, weakly woody sarmentose vines and (rarely) treelets, sometimes flowering when only 5 dm tall but potentially attaining 3(-4) m, essentially like M. debilis except in the scabrousstrigose or glabrescent pod and prevaiUngly ovateacuminate rather than obovate lfts (but Ift-outline broadly randomly fallible), commonly armed on stems and petioles with scattered recurved aculei but sometimes erratically so and occasionally unarmed, the terete or striately nerved stems commonly at once setose or setulose and finely pubemlent but either type of trichome at times lacking, the bicolored lfts most often either setose-strigose or both setose and pubemlent on both faces, frequently either simply pubemlent or glabrous above and setose-strigose beneath (the proximal lfts sometimes more densely so than distal ones), less often glabrous or glabrate on both faces, always discontinuously setose-ciliate.
Stipules erect, lanceolate 2-7(-8) mm, the firm blade either glabrous or pubescent externally, l-3(-4)-nerved, coarsely setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 1.5-6.5(-8) cm; distal pair of lfts obliquely lance-elliptic or semi-ovate, exceptionally elliptic-obovate, from deeply semicordate base, often broadest near middle and acuminate or more abmptly acute and mucronate, the larger ones 25-80(-95) x 11-27(-37) mm, (1.9-)2-3.3 times as long as wide, the anterior 1ft of proximal pair subsymmetrically cordate to lanceolate, (2-)4-12 mm; secondary nerves from midrib either expiring or camptodrome within the margin.
Peduncles (1-)2-5 per node, l-4(-4.7) cm; capitula usually globose, rarely ellipsoid, prior to anthesis moriform, without filaments 4.5-6.5(-7) mm diam.; bracts linear-oblanceolate 0.6-2 mm, either glabrous or pubemlent dorsally, weakly or minutely ciliolate; flowers of M. debilis, the corolla-lobes pubemlent or exceptionally glabrous except for minute granular cilia.
Pods usuaUy numerous per capitulum, either sessile or contracted at base into a tme stipe or a stipelike neck 1-4 mm, the narrowly oblong body (8-)13-40(-43) x 4-8 mm, (1-)2- 5(-6)-seeded, the replum usually scabrous with forwardly subappressed setae less than 1 mm (commonly less than 0.5 mm), the valves in S. America similarly strigose and usually also pubemlent, the strigae sparse to densely crowded, but the valves (in Mexico especially) sometimes merely pubemlent or even quite glabrous.
I here follow Rudd (1968) and Grether (1982) in circumscription of M. albida, except that I transfer var. aequatoriana Rudd to M. debilis, of which it has the densely hispid pod.
Due to lack of fmiting material I have been unable to consider M. albida var. pochutlensis R. Grether, to which the same argument would apply in theory.
If var. aequatoriana (and presumably var. pochutlensis) is maintained in M. albida, the circumscription of the latter must perforce be extended to accommodate the whole set of variations on the Sensitivae theme that I have assembled above under the title of M. debilis.
When the spectrum of variation in habit, foliage, pubescence and inflorescence encompassed by M. debilis and M. albida is reviewed, the only practical division compatible with geographical dispersal is that proposed herein.
I suspect that it is an artificial line arbitrarily drawn through a single polymorphic complex.
It may be said that the leaflets of M. albida tend to be acuminate and broadest at or shortly below mid-blade, whereas those of M. debilis tend to be broader distally and abmptly acute or obtuse at apex; but there are numerous exceptions, recognized, for example, in Grether's description of Mexican M. albida.
Moreover elliptic leaflets occur in both species.
Rudd (1968), following and elaborating Robinson's (1898) revision of M. albida, divided the species into varieties characterized by quality and dispersal of trichomes on leaves and pods, a practice which, if carried out evenhandedly through Mimosa, would vastly increase the number of infraspecific taxa without gain in exact definitions.
McVaugh (1987: 203) has referred to the pubescence variants found in southwestern Mexico as "hardly more than forms," but Ijudge that they can usefully be sorted into two principal categories, corresponding with var. albida and var. glabrior as defined in the varietal key that follows, but no further divisible.
Otherwise identical forms of M. albida with leaflets all setose on both faces, all setose beneath only, or some proximal leaflets setose but the distal ones not so (a pubescence pattem that recurs in M. debilis and in other subseries of ser. Mimosa) are sympatric over most of the range of the species.
Grether's map (1982: 82) vividly illustrates the sympatry of so-called vars. strigosa and albida in Mexico, and of vars. glabrior and euryphylla on the Pacific slope southward from middle Sinaloa; similarly random patterns of variation extend south along the Andes into Pem.
Rudd defined a var. willdenowii endemic to northem Venezuela by its supposedly "essentially glabrous" craspedium, but the density of strigae on the valves is in reality quite variable both inside and outside of the variety's supposed range.
The var. willdenowii is here reformulated to accommodate the Andean and Venezuelan races of M. albida with relatively wide pod, a feature that seems to be securely linked to dispersal.
Key to varieties of M. albida 1.
Plants of North America.
2.
Pods 6-8 mm wide; Panama 324c. var. willdenowii (p. 544).
2.
Pods not over 5.5 mm wide; widespread from lowland middle Mexico s.-ward.
3.
Pod coarsely strigose overall, alike on valves and replum 324a. var. albida (p. 543).
3.
Pod thinly strigulose (and in addition either puberulent or not) or glabrate. .. .
324b. var. glabrior (p. 544).
1.
Plants of South America.
4.
Pods 3-5.5 mm wide; Pacific slope of Andes and Pacific coastal lowlands of n. and centr. Peru, lowland e. Bolivia 324a. var. albida (p. 543).
4.
Pods 5.5-8 mm wide; common at montane elevations (1000 m upward) in the n. Andes, from n. Pem to n. Colombia, e. in Venezuela along the coastal mts to Miranda 324c. var. willdenowii (p. 544).
324a. Mimosa albida Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. albida.
M. albida Willdenow, 1806, I.e., sens, str.—''Habitat in America meridionali."
, the locality given by Kunth, Mimoses 2, pi. 1.
1819 & z« Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, Nov. gen. sp. 6(qu): 249.
1842: "in litore Oceani Pacifici, prope pagum Moche Pemvianomm [near Tmjillo, depto. La Libertad, ±8°S]."-Holotypus, B-WILLD 19062, seen in microfiche! = F Neg. 1295; isotypi, Humboldt & Bonpland 3756, P-HBK! P (hb. Bonpland.)! (?) M. strigosa Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1030.
1806.- ''Habitat in America meridionali [the collector not recorded]."-Holotypus, B-WILLD 19065, seen in microfiche, is a flowering specimen not identifiable to variety.
The plant described as M. strigosa by Kunth in Nova gen. sp. 6(qu): 248, collected by Humboldt & Bonpland "ad Orenocum" is probably conspecific, but is of controversial provenance (PHBK!).-M albida var. strigosa (Willdenow) B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 311.
1898.
M. racemosa Schlechtendal, Linnaea 12: 557.
1838.— MAP 51.
Western parts of South America.
Ranges of two varieties of M. albida (var. albida shown only e. and s. of Panama) and M. sensibilis. "
[MEXICO] In Pr[ov.] Oajaca leg. Muhlenpfordt.
Specimen unicum floriferum.. . ."—Holotypus not seen, to be sought at HAL.—Equated by Bentham, 1875: 391 with M. floribunda, and by Rudd, 1968: 437, with M. albida albida, with which the protologue closely agrees.
M. floribunda sensu Hooker, Icon. pi. 4: t. 373.
1841 (specimen mexicanum a Galeotti pr. Jalapa lectum); non Willd.
M. albida var. albida and var. strigosa sensu Rudd, 1968: 437; R. Grether, 1982: 84.
Within its species distinguished in S. America by the relatively narrow, sessile or subsessile craspedium and in Mexico and Central America by its densely strigose replum and valves; stems unarmed to densely aculeate, and lfts from strigose and pubemlent on both faces to strigose beneath and either glabrous or simply pubemlent above, rarely glabrescent on both faces.
Widespread and common over most of tropical and submontane Mexico and Central America, extending n. on the Pacific slope to Sinaloa (±24°]^ and on the Gulf lowlands to Tamaulipas and Yucatan Peninsula; unknown from Panama, Venezuela [except for questionable type-locality of M. strigosa, q.v. supra], or Ecuador, but reappearing on roadsides, in waste places and in disturbed thickets between sea level and 1500(-l 730) m along the Pacific slope of n. and centr. Pem, from Tumbes s. to Lima; remotely disjunct in unrecorded habitats at 700-1500 m in deptos.
Yungas and Santa Cmz, Bolivia, and in lowland capoeira on upper rio Madeira in Rondonia, Brazil.-Fl. in S. America I-VIII(-?), perhaps intermittently through the year.
Map 51 (showing range in S. America and Panama only).
The var. albida is adapted to secondary habitats and seeds prolifically.
It appears genuinely native in Mexico.
Possibly the disjunct South American populations descend from early introductions.
Some flowering specimens from northem Pem cannot be distinguished certainly from var. willdenowii, creating doubt about the exact dispersal limits of the two varieties in this region.
Of the few known Bolivian records, that from Santa Cmz (R. S. Williams 1449, NY) bears fmit and is unequivocally var. albida; those from Yungas (Bang 1435 and Rusby 1297, both ISTY), in flower only, may require reevaluation.
324b. Mimosa albida Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. glabrior B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts33: 311.
1898.-"CoU.
Heyde & Lux at Malpais, Dept.
Santa Rosa, Guatemala, altitude 1230 m, n. 4122 of J. D. Smith's distribution."
—Holotypus, GH!; isotypus, ISTY! M. sesquijugata Donnell Smith, Bot. Gaz. (Crawfordsville) 13: 74.
1888.—"In rock crevices near Santa Rosa, Dept.
Baja Verapaz [Guatemala], alt. 5,000 feet, July, 1887 [leg. Tuerckheim 7527]."-Holotypus, US!—Equated with var. albida by Rudd, 1968: 438.
M. manzanilloana Rose, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 1: 326.
1895.-"[MEXICO.
Colima;] Manzanillo, December 1-31.
1890, [E. Palmer] No. 905."-Holoty. pus, US!; isotypus, MICH!—Equated with var. glabrior hy Kudd, 1968: 438.
M. albida var. euryphylla B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 311.
1898.-"Collected by E. W. Nelson in the valley of Jiquipilas, Chiapas [Mexico], alt. 675 to 850 m., 16 to 18 August, 1895, no. 2927 "-Holotypus (R. Grether, 1982: 85), US!; isotypus, GH! M. mazatlana M. E. Jones, Contr. W. Bot. 15: 133.
1929.-"[M E. Jones] No. 22447, Mazatlan, Sinaloa, November 21,1926, and No. 22446, November 29."-Lectotypus (Morton, Contr. U.S. NaU.
Herb. 29(2): 99.
1945), Jones 22447 = POM 162432.— Equated by Morton (I.e.) with M. manzanilloana.
M. sesquijugata and M. manzanilloana sensu B. L. Robinson, 1898: 308, 309; Britton & Rose, 1928: 149.
M. albida sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 149, ex parte.
M. albida var. euryphylla and var. glabrior sensu Rudd, 1968: 438; R. Grether, 1982: 85, 86.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In thomscrub and semideciduous woodland, mostly below 1000 m, scattered around the Pacific foothills of Mexico from Sinaloa to Chiapas, inland to the Balsas basin in Michoacan and Jalisco; apparently disjunct near 1500 m on the n. slope of Sa. de Minas in n. Baja Verapaz, Guatemala (M. sesquijugata, said to be unarmed and in need of further study).—Fl.
XII onwards.
324c. Mimosa albida Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. willdenowii (Poiret) Rudd, Phytologia 6: 437.
1968.
M. willdenowii Poiret, Encycl. suppl. 1: 50.
1810, a legitimate substitute for M. floribunda Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1031.
1806, nom. illeg., non Ventenat, IS03.—^'Habitat ad Caracas [Venezuela] .
.
.
Bredemeyer."
-Holotypus, B-WILLD 19066, seen in microfiche and F Neg. 13231; isotypus, NYl—M. floribunda var. willdenowii (Poiret) DeCandolle, Prodr. 2:426.
1825, comb, illegit.
M. albida var. floribunda (Willdenow) B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 311.
1898.
M. williamsii Standley, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 18: 105.
1916, nom. illeg.-"Type .
.
. [US] 677919 . .. in the vicinity of Penonome, Panama, Febmary or March 1906, by R. S. Williams (no. 101)."-Holotypus, US!; isotypus, NY!—M standleyi Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 12.
1919; non M. williamsii Rusby, 1912.
M. albida var. erratica Macbride, Publ. Field Columbian Mus., Bot. Ser. 8: 91.
1930.-"Pem:. .. Tambo de Pariocota, Dept. of Ancash, Oct. 8, 1922, Macbride & Featherstone 2522."—Holotypus, F! = F Neg. 54804.
Distinguished from var. albida solely by the broad craspedium, this commonly stipitate, the foliage and stems variably aculeate and pubescent as var. albida.
In hedges, thickets, and disturbed bmshwoodland, common and locally abundant, mostly between 1000 and 2700 m, in the Andes of Colombia and Ecuador, from Sa.
Nevada de Sta. Marta and Antioquia s. to Loja and adj. Pem, and n.-e. in Venezuela through Cord, de Merida and Sa.
Costanera to state of Miranda; w. at low elevations, perhaps introduced, to centr. Panama.—Fl. irregularly almost throughout the year.
Map 51.
325.
Mimosa sensibilis Grisebach, Symb. fl. argent. (=Abh.
Konigl.
Ges.
Wiss.
Gottingen 24:) 19.
1879.—Holotypus infra sub var. sensibili indicatur.
Slender macrophyllidious shrubs ±1.5-3 m with terete brown defoliate tmnks paniculate or effusely branched distally, the flowering branchlets either solitary or in unequal pairs, either unarmed or erratically armed on some intemodes (and occasionally on some lf-stks) with 1-2 distantly infrastipular and occasionally also 1 remotely infrapetiolar, broad-based recurved aculei 2 — 4 mm, glabrous throughout except for setulose pulvinules and setose-marginate lfts or sometimes thinly strigose on dorsal face of some proximal lfts, the olivaceous foliage either unchanged or bmnnescent when dried, subconcolorous, the small globose capitula either solitary, or geminate, or paired with a floriferous branchlet in the axil of primary cauline lvs, and ultimately pseudoracemose on tenuous, shortly exserted efoliate branchlets.
Stipules firm erect, ovate or lanceolate, often obtuse, commonly 5- 11 -nerved from base, glabrous or sometimes pectinately ciliate, the blades becoming dry stramineous, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of primary lvs 2.5-4.5 cm, at middle 0.4-0.8 mm diam., the shallow open ventral sulcus bridged and minutely spiculate at apex, the lvs associated with capitula sometimes much reduced in size; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of each 5-12 mm, the distal pair of lfts much larger than the very unequal proximal pair, one of which is often fully suppressed, or at times reduced to a minute dry blade resembling the paraphyllidia at very base ofrachis; lfts ofdistal pair obUquely elUptic, lanceelliptic or semi-ovate-elliptic from deeply semicordate base, sharply or bluntly deltate at apex, 2.5-5.5 X 1-1.8 cm, ±2.1-3.2 times as long as wide, the midrib moderately displaced and gently incurved, the secondary venulation brochidodrome within the margin.
Peduncles 6-25 mm; capitula without filaments 4-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform or (var. urucumensis) hispid with emergent bracts; bracts commonly linear-elliptic 0.9-2, rarely 3-4 mm, some of the lowest often united into an incipient involucre, the rest linear-elliptic or subfiliform 0.2-0.3 mm wide, minutely ciliolate, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, most or all bisexual; calyx 0.15-0.25 mm, the tmncate or obscurely angulate rim either naked or microscopically ciliolate; corolla narrowly vase-shaped, prominently 4-ribbed 2-2.8 mm, the concave ovate lobes 0.7- 0.85 X 0.5 mm, either glabrous or (rarely) pubemlent; filaments lilac or whitish faintly lilactinged, free to base, exserted 4-6 mm.
Pods 2- several per capitulum, subsessile, in profile oblong 25-37 X 6-12 mm, the shallowly undulate replum 0.3-0.4 mm wide, smooth or weakly setulose, the papery glabrous, green and finally stramineous valves breaking up when ripe into (2- )2>-^ free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 6-9 mm long; seeds (few seen) compressed-lentiform ±5 X 4.5 mm, the testa fuscous-olivaceous dull.
Mimosa sensibilis resembles M. velloziana and differs from M. debilis in the broad, weakly setose pod, and is distinguished from M. velloziana by tmly fmticose rather than weakly fmtescent, scandent-sarmentose growth-habit and only weakly armed or unarmed stems.
Burkart (1948: 206) considered loss ofthe anterior proximal leaflet of each pinna to be characteristic of M. sensibilis, but I find that it may be either fully suppressed or represented by a minute blade resembling the paraphyllidia at base of rachis.
Burkart (I.e.) further suggested that M. sensibilis might prove synonymous with Brazilian M. glaucescens Bentham, and has so identified (in annotation of specimens) some Bolivian examples (e.g., Steinbach 8120, NY) that I confidently refer to M. sensibilis.
Genuine M. glaucescens (the name is an illegitimate taxonomic synonym of M. nuda var. glaberrima of this account) has the narrow pod of M. debilis and M. nuda, and is here equated with Burkart's concept of M. obtusifolia.
Material collected by Hassler and Fiebrig and distributed from Geneva as M. glaucescens or M. glaucescens ramosa have the brownish-glaucescent foliage and smooth stems ofM. nuda var. glaberrima, but the shmbby stature and broad pod of M. sensibilis, of which they appear to form a distinct geographic race, described below as var. aquidabani.
A third variety, with emergent bracts and puberulentflowers,first described as M. velloziana fma moorei Hoehne, can be recognized from the middle Paraguai Valley.
The center of diversity for M. sensibilis now appears to Ue, not in the Andean foothills where the species was first recognized, but further to the east in the Paraguai Basin.
Key to varieties of M. sensibilis 1.
Lvs when dried remaining fresh green; stems randomly aculeate.
2.
Interfloral bracts 1-2 mm, shorter than the glabrous fl-buds; s.-e. Bolivia and n. Jujuy, Argentina 325a. var. sensibilis (p. 546).
2.
Interfloral bracts 3-4 mm, projecting far beyond puberulent fl-buds; w. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil and adj. Paraguay 325b. var. urucumensis (p. 546).
1.
Lvs when dried brownish-glaucescent; stems perfectly smooth, unarmed; e.-centr. Paraguay (S. Pedro) 325c. var. aquidabani (p. 546).
NY), designated as type before I had realized its identity with M. velloziana fma mooreana.
325c. Mimosa sensibilis Grisebach var. aquidabani Bameby, var. nov., a var. sensibili caulibus laevissimis inermibus, foliolisque (statu sicco, ut ea M. nudae var. glaberrimae, cum qua controversa fuit) bmnneo-glaucescentibus diversa.—Paraguay.
Concepci6n: zwischen rio Apa und rio Aquidaban, X.1908 (fl, fr), K. Fiebrig 4065.—Holotypus + isotypi, G. In unrecorded habitat, but to be sought in bmsh-woodland near 350 m, known only from deptos.
Concepcion and Amambay, Paraguay (Apa-Aquidaban divide and Sa. de Amambay).—Fl.
IV, ripe fr.
X, the full season of anthesis unknown.
Map 51.
325a. Mimosa sensibilis Grisebach var. sensibilis.
M. sensibilis Grisebach, 1879, I.e., sens, str.—"[Bolivia.] Tarija, Cuesta de Aguayrente."
—Holotypus, Hieronymus & Lorentz 618, not seen, perhaps at GOET; isotypus, +B = F Neg. 1434\ (reproduced by Burkart, 1948, lam. 24).
M. sensibilis sensu Burkart, 1948: 204, fig. 36S. Characters as given in key to varieties.
In open woodland, 300-900 m, around w. and n. margins of the Chaco forest in Sta. Cmz and Tarija, Bolivia, adj. Jujuy, Argentina, and n. Paraguay.-Fl.
II-VIII. Map 51.
325b. Mimosa sensibilis Grisebach var. urucumensis Bameby, nom. et stat. nov. M. velloziana fma moorei Hoehne, Com. lin. telegr., Bot. 8: 23, lam. 137.
1919.-''[Hoehne] Nos.
2645-2648 .
.
.
Colhida en Commba, Estado do Matto Grosso; florescendo em Junho."
— Isosyntypus, Hoehne 2646 = R 3320, dated Vn.l911,US! Characters as given in key to varieties.
In cerrado on slopes of morros and in open semideciduous woodland, ± 100-300 m, local in middle Paraguai basin in far w. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil (Commba and vicinity) and n. Paraguay (Alto Paraguay and w. Chaco).—Fl.
IIIVIII.
Map 51.
This poorly characterized variety was first known to me through Hatschbach 28510 (HBG, 326.
Mimosa debilis Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4(2): 1029.
1806.-Typus infra sub var. debili indicatur.
Herbs and weakly fmtescent subshrubs, at first or permanently erect, or as often diffuse or scrambling and finally thicket-forming or sarmentose, at maturity commonly 8-20(-25) dm but potentially flowering precociously and then appearing monocarpic, rarely reported laticiferous, the terete or (var. amnis-mortium) quadrangular stems and lf-stks commonly at once armed with scattered recurved brown-tipped aculei 1-3.5 mm and hispid with fine yellowish or sordid setae to ±1-2 mm mixed or not with fine pubemlence (but aculei, setae, and fine trichomes, or some of them, not infrequently lacking), the bicolored lfts brownish-olivaceous or leaden-glaucescent above, paler beneath, either subequally strigose-pilose on both faces, or on dorsal face only, rarely quite glabrous, the solitary or geminate, rarely 3-4-nate globose capitula forming a leafless or basally leafy-bracteate, simple or few-branched raceme exserted ±1-4 dm from foliage.
Stipules lanceolate or ligulate (2.5-)3.5-8 X 0.7-2 mm, the firm blades prominently 3-5(-9)-nerved, dorsally either densely pilose, or pubemlent, or glabrous, setose-cUiate, glabrous within, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (0.6-)l- 6.5(-7) cm, at middle 0.4-1.3 mm diam., 1- or exceptionally 2-sulcate ventrally, commonly espiculate (but spicules usual in var. amnis-mortium and random elsewhere); pinnae 1-jug., the rachis including pulvinus 4-20 mm, the first of 2 pairs of lfts 0.5-2 mm distant from Unearlanceolate or narrowly ovate paraphyllidia 1- 2.5(-3) mm; lfts of distal pair obliquely obovate to oblanceolate, less often lance-elliptic, elliptic, or ovate-acuminate (17-)20-60(-65) x (6-)7- 23(-30) mm, at base semicordate, at apex obtuse mucronulate to deltate-apiculate, all palmately 3-5-nerved from pulvinule, the secondary nerves from the variably excentric, forwardly incurved midrib incurved-ascending nearly or quite to margin of blade, either not or feebly brochidodrome, the discontinuous margin with forwardly appressed setae free for ±0.6-1.5 mm, all venation prominulous and usually pallid beneath, above scarcely raised or fully immersed.
Peduncles 5-20(-22) mm; capitula without filaments (4-)4.5-7.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis either conelike and canescently setose-pilosulous, or moriform; bracts Unear-attenuate or linear 0.6- 3.5 X 0.2-0.5(-0.6) mm, distally either glabrous or dorsally gray-pilosulous with very slender setae to 0.2-1.4 mm, densely or at least residually setulose-ciliolate, persistent; fl-buds distally graypuberulent, sometimes minutely so; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, most or all bisexual; calyx 0.15-0.4 mm, the rim glabrous or minutely ciliolate; corolla narrowly funnelform or subtubular 2-2.6 mm, the ovate concave, scarcely thickened 1-nerved lobes 0.5-0.7 x 0.4-0.6 mm; filaments lilac-, roseor magenta-pink, free to base, exserted 4-7.5 mm; ovary at anthesis either glabrous or pubemlent.
Pods radiating in a nearly always dense cluster, sessile, in profile oblongelUptic or broadly linear 10-18(-20) x 3-4.7(- 5) mm, 2-4-seeded, the scarcely constricted replum 0.3-0.6(-0.7) mm wide, at apex abmptly short-mucronate or submuticous, except in var. parapitiensis armed on back and sides with erect brownor purple-tipped, tapering setae to (0.6-)1.5-3.5(-4) mm, the thin greenish, later stramineous or purpUsh-brown and papery valves low-colliculate over each seed and variably setose or both pubemlent and setose (glabrous), when ripe breaking up into free-falling articles 3-5 mm long; seeds plumply compressed-ovoid 2.3-3.5 X 1.8-3 mm, the smooth testa fawnbrown or fuscous, dull.
The foregoing circumscription of M. debilis embraces all so-caUed Sensitivae that have small narrow hispid pods combined with leaflets lacking the continuous rimlike marginal nerve characteristic of M. nuda sensu lato.
It is arbitrarily distinguished from M. albida by hispid, not strigose pods, a feeble character of convenience that is, however, strengthened by vicariant dispersal.
When much material of M. debilis and M. nuda is assembled, it is possible to trace a gradual transition between a continuous and a discontinuous marginal nerve, but the percentage of ambiguous individuals is small, and where the two species are sympatric, on and to the south and west ofthe Brazilian Planalto, the distinction is ordinarily sharp.
My definition of M. debilis allows within the species the same visually distracting but, on analysis, clearly random variation in armament and hispid or pubemlent vesture that occurs in M. albida and M. nuda, and an equivalent or even greater range in outline, absolute size, and relative width ofthe terminal leaflets.
Thefloralbracts vary from much shorter than the flower-buds to much longer than them, when they form a cone in praefloration.
Leaflet-outline and bract length appear to be stabilized in parts of the whole range of the species, but elsewhere are independently erratic.
Strictly typical M. debilis, found in lowland savanna habitats in the Orinoco and Amazon basins, has ample obovate leaflets and conelike capitula.
Morphologically similar plants occur locally on the Brazilian Planalto, especially around Belo Horizonte in Minas Gerais and in the Federal District, where they are sometimes directly sympatric with M. nuda var. glaberrima.
A form with small oblanceolate leaflets and moriform capitula, found to the exclusion of other members of subser. Mimosa in Costa Rica, Panama, and northeastern Colombia (Meta) has been segregated in Central America as M. panamensis (Benth.) Standi.,
and in that limited geographic context seems distinct indeed.
But entirely similar plants are frequently encountered in eastem Bolivia, in a region where the whole group of Sensitivae is especially diverse and populous.
Attempts to define these ampleand smaU-leaved populations are defeated by random occurrence, out of geographic context, of intermediate states; moreover plants combining ample leaflets with moriform capitula and small leaflets with conelike capitula are known.
It remains an open question whether morphologically similar but remotely disjunct populations ofM. debilis represent independent but paraUel modifications, in situ, of a common ancestor. or are genetically homogeneous and artificially dispersed.
Many of the Sensitivae are adapted to unstable ecotonal habitats and flourish in disturbed environments.
They seed prolifically, and the hispid one-seeded articles of the fmit seem designed to promote distant zoochorous dispersal.
It is a suspicious circumstance that the known range on the Planalto of broad-leaved, cone-headed var. debilis is confined to a small segment of Sa. do Espinhago in Minas Gerais and to the Federal District in the central highlands, at elevations between 900 and 1600 meters.
Except for Pohl 2213 (W) collected long ago near Goias Velho there is no record known to me for the present state of Goias, and no obvious explanation for the failure of an often mderal plant to colonize more widely the ostensibly hospitable cerrado province.
These planaltine populations may exemplify secondary dispersal in M. debilis, and may eventually become more widespread on the Planalto.
Similarly the Central American ''panamensis^' could be derived from Bolivian parentage.
But speculation on this topic has little factual basis.
While I feel obliged to disregard some of the more eye-catching diversity, which seems impervious to organization into discrete units, I find it convenient and probably realistic to disentangle from the mass what appear to be five distinctive races of M. debilis, separable as follows: Key to varieties of M. debilis Stems terete or finely many-ribbed; lf-stks 1 -sulcate ventrally.
2.
AU or most intemodes of stem aculeate; diffuse or assurgent herbs becoming sarmentose shrubs; interruptedly widespread from Costa Rica s. to Pacific Ecuador, s. through the Orinoco valley and Amazonia to the Brazilian Planalto, e. Bolivia, and subtropical Argentina.
3.
Stems at once hispid and puberulent, simply hispid, or simply puberulent; replum of pod (and often valves also) hispid-setose.
4.
Valves of pod glabrous or thinly hispid, if somewhat densely so the distal lfts obovateoblanceolate, broadest above mid-blade; range as given, except for Ecuador 326a. var. debilis (p. 548).
4.
Valves of pod densely comose; distal lfts obliquely ovate-elliptic, broadest at or a little below mid-blade; Pacific lowland Ecuador and Galapagos Is 326b. var. aequatoriana (p. 549).
3.
Stems and pods completely glabrous; local in Andean foothills of s. Bolivia 326c. var. parapitiensis (p. 549).
2.
Intemodes of stem unarmed; the stems stiffly erect, either functionally herbaceous wandlike or becoming fruticose in age; upper Paraguai and adj. Beni basins in Bolivia and Brazil (Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso do Sul) 326d. var. vestita (p. 550).
Stems sharply quadrangular, the angles at once puberulent, forwardly setulose, and retro-aculeate, the plane intervals glabrous; lf-stks ventrally depressed and shallowly 2-sulcate; local on headwaters of rio Araguaia in s.-e. Mato Grosso, Brazil 326e. var. amnis-mortium (p. 552).
326a. Mimosa debilis Humboldt & Bonpland ex WiUdenow var. debilis.
M. debilis Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, 1806, I.e., sens. str.—"Habitat in America meridionali prope Caripe [Sucre or Monagas, Venezuela]."
— Holotypus, B-WILLD 19061, seen in microfiche and F Neg. 13211; isotypus, Humboldt di Bonpland 299, P-HBK! (?)M obtusifolia Willdenow, Enum. pi. 1047.
1809.- ''Habitat in BrasUia."
-Holotypus, B-WILLD 19064, consisting of two leaves from a plant cultivated at Berlin, ofinexact provenance, seen in microfiche and F Neg. 1348\ M. adhaerens Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, Nov. gen. sp. 6: 249.
1824.—"Crescit cum [M. strigosa]."
", i.e., "ad Orinocum."
—Holotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland s.n.,
"Orenoco."
, P-HBK!-Wrongly equated by Bentham, 1876: 305, with M. floribunda WiUd. and by Rudd, 1968: 437, with M. albida.
M.fervida Martius, Rora 21 (Beibl.
2,1): 57.
1838.- "In sepibus provinciae Minamm," the locality corrected in op. cU.
22 (Beibl.
1): 9.
1839 to: "prope Cujaba [Mato Grosso]."—Holotypus, Silva Manso in Martius 280, M!; isotypi, MO! NY! W! M. rixosa Martius, Flora 21 (Beibl.
2,1): 57.
1838.- "In sepibus provinciae Minarum."
—Holotypus, Martius s.n. from "S. Joao d'El Rey", M! M. pauciseta Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 362.
1841 (^''paniculata,'^ a typographic error corrected by Bentham, op. cit.
5: 85.
1846).—"Minas Geraes, Claussen, S'^/Zo."
-Lectotypus, Claussen 87, K! = NY Neg. 7775; isotypus, NY!—Equated by Bentham, 1874: 391, with M. rixosa.
M. notata Steudel, Flora 26: 758.
1843.-"Hostmann und Kappler im Innem von Surinam.. .no.
1205."
— Isotypi, MO! NY! W! (holotypus to be sought at P). - Equated by Bentham, 1875: 391, with M. debilis.
M. hostmanni Bentham in Hooker, London J. Bot. 5: 84. l^A6.-''Surinam,Hostmann, n. i25i."-Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1775; isotypus, BM!-Equated by Bentham, 1875, I.e., with M. debilis.
M. debilis (?) var. panamensis Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 391. m5.''"Panama, Seemann.''- Holotypus, Seemann 98, collected "in pratis pr. urbem Nata", K! = NY Neg. 7925; isotypus, GH!- M. panamensis (Bentham) Standley, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 18: 104.
1916.
M. argentinensis Burkart, Bol. Soc. Argent.
Bot. 1(1): 39.
1945 & Darwiniana 8(1): 217, fig. 39, lam. 26.
1948.—"Argentina.
Prov. de Jujuy: Capital, Burkart y Troncoso, 15.11.1940 ... SI 11081 "-Holotypus, SI, seen in cited phototypus!; isotypus, GH!; isoparatypus, T. Meyer 3528, NY! M. argentinensis var. saltensis Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 219.
1948.-"Argentina.
Salta: Dep.
Oran, Rio de las Pedras, leg. C. Calcagnini 900, 9-XI- 1902 "-Holotypus, BAB 7742, not seen.
Stems aculeate (some unarmed toward inflorescence), usually diffuse or sarmentose, but sometimes erect when young, terete or finely multicostulate; distal leaflets broadly obovate to oblanceolate, the longest 2-6.5 cm, 1.6-4 times as long as wide, never glabrous on both faces but sometimes so on upper one; capitula either conelike or moriform in praefloration, the bracts most often puberulent, or both puberulent and setose, but the setae seldom dense, not hiding the epidermis.
In savanna and brush-woodland, becoming weedy in disturbed places, along fencerows, and in pasture thickets, from below 50 m in Amazonia to 1600 m in Minas Gerais, interruptedly widespread over the Orinoco and Amazon basins in n.-e. Colombia, Venezuela, and Brazil, extending weakly e. to Surinam and sporadically n.-w. to centr. Panama and Costa Rica, s. through the Madeira-Beni basin to e. Bolivia, Paraguay, and both n.-w. and n.-e. Argentina, and through upland planaltine Brazil to n. Parana.—R. almost through the year in humid lowlands, on the PlanaUo mostly I-IV. Map 52.
The polymorphic var. debilis accommodates the residue of M. debilis sensu lato after extraction of the four other varieties.
Some aspects of variation in it have been discussed above under the title of the species.
Elements of the present var. debilis were referred by Bentham (1876) to M. rixosa, M. debilis (sens, restr.), and by Burkart to M. rixosa and M. argentinensis, but Burkart's M. obtusifolia (1948: 214, fig. 38) isM. nuda var. glaberrima of this account.
326b. Mimosa debilis Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. aequatoriana (Rudd) Bameby, comb. nov. M. albida var. aequatoriana Rudd, Phytologia 16: 440.
1968.-"[US] 1021791, collected in the vicinity of Guayaquil, Ecuador, August 11,1918, by J. N. Rose and George Rose (no. 22777)."—Holotypus, US!; isotypi, GH!NY! M. albida var. aequatoriana sensu Rudd in Wiggins & Porter, ¥1.
Galapagos Is. 653, fig. 178.
1971.
Scrambling shrubs 6-25 dm, randomly armed, hispid and viUosulous, the lfts puberulent on both faces, strigose only beneath; leaf-stalks 2-7 cm; lfts of distal pairs obliquely ovate or elliptic, abruptly acute or acuminulate 3-6(-6.5) x 1.3- 3 cm, 2.2-2.9 times as long as wide, broadest near or a little below mid-blade, the small proximal anterior 1ft of each pinna 3-9 mm; pods sessile, narrowly oblong 8-15 x 3-5 mm, densely puberulent and hispid overall, the setae of replum to 0.6-1 mm, those of valves 1-3 mm.
In thickets and waste places below 200 m, locally plentiful in Pacific lowland Ecuador (provs.
Esmeraldas, Guayas and El Oro), and once recorded from Isla S. Cristobal in the Galapagos archipelago.—Fl.
III-IX. Map 53.
As mentioned in discussion of M. albida, the locally well characterized var. aequatoriana presents the foUage of that species combined with the pod of M. debilis.
It illustrates and emphasizes the over-close relationship between these species, which are here maintained in the interest of convenience.
Mutually exclusive definition of the pair is impossible unless var. aequatoriana is transferred to M. debilis, even though this taxonomic ruse may well not reflect its probable origin from vicariant M. albida.
326c. Mimosa debilis Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. parapitiensis (Burkart) Barneby, stat. nov. M. parapitiensis Burkart, Bol. Soc. Argent.
Bot. 1(1): 36 + fig. 1945.-"Bolivia: Chaco boreal.
Sector Parapiti, loma arenosa 27 de Noviembre, Teodoro Rojas 7272, Marzo de 1935."—Holotypus, SI, not seen, but the exemplary protologue decisive.
Essentially like var. debilis in habit, in aculeate armament, and in shape and venation of lfts, but almost glabrous, the stipules and floral bracts thinly setose-ciliolate, the midrib of some lfts inconspicuously strigulose beneath, the coroUalobes minutely puberulent or (ex char.) glabrous, the pod completely hairless smooth.
On dry hillsides near 700 m, known only from the Andean foothills of s.-w. Sta. Cruz, Bolivia, MAP 52.
Tropical South America and (inset, top right) Costa Rica and Panama.
Range of M. debilis Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. debilis. in lat. 20°00'-30'S (Cumbarute; Parapiti).-Fl.
XII-IV. Map 53.
Mimosa parapitiensis stands in relation to M. debilis var. debilis as does typical M. nuda to its commoner var. glaberrima: each represents the last stage in a regressive sequence of indumentum-losses, the stage at which even the setae of the pod's replum are suppressed.
Since neither of these glabrate states shows any peculiarity linked with loss of indumentum, they are best recognized, if at all, at varietal rank.
Beyond the protologue I have seen of var. parapitiensis only Herzog 1176 (G) from Cumbarute.
Brooke 5828 (NY) from Santa Cruz, but without exact locality, closely approaches it, but cannot be positively assigned here for lack of pods.
Poor specimens from Yungas (Rusby 1303, NY) suggest a small northward range-extension beyond that indicated above.
326d. Mimosa debilis Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. vestita (Bentham) Bameby, comb. nov. M. rixosa var. (?) vestita Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 362.
1841.-"[e] Rio Janeiro [misit] Langsdorff."
—Holotypus, Riedel 52 (vix florens), coUected at Cuiaba, Mato MAP 53.
Southwestern Brazil and eastem Bolivia, and (inset, bottom right) Ecuador.
Range of varieties of M. debilis other than var. debilis.
Grosso in 1827, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 777^.
M. platyphylla sensu Malme, 1900: 36; non Bentham.
Subshrubs at first erect from xylopodium, with stems solitary or few and wandlike, simple or strictly few-branched distally, nowhere aculeate, including the leafless or depauperately leaf-bracteate pseudoraceme (6-)8-12 dm but sometimes in age frutescent and attaining 2(-2.5) m, densely hispid or loosely strigose with smooth or subscaberulous setae to 0.6-1.5 mm mixed with minute puberulence (exceptionally glabrate), the lfts usually setose on both faces, sometimes (in Bolivia) beneath only, then either glabrous or puberulent above, the inflorescence (fresh) sometimes clammy to touch but eglandtUar; leaf-stalks 6-35(-45) mm; distal pair of lfts obliquely obovate 2-5(-5.5) X l-2.6(-3) cm; capitula without filaments 4.5-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike, the bracts 1.5-3.5 mm, dorsally sericeous or puberulent, setose-ciUolate; pods 11- 20 X 4-4.5 mm, the valves concealed or almost so by a dense mane of tapering setae to 2.5-4 mm.
In low, often seasonally wet places in campo cerrado or open shrub-woodland, sometimes colonial on roadsides, ±250-500 m, locally plentiful on both slopes of the Paraguai-Guapore watershed, from the Pantanal in Mato Grosso do Sul and s. Mato Grosso w. to Sta. Cruz and adj. Beni, Bolivia.-FL.
II-VI(-?).
Map 53.
The var. vestita has been set off" from polymorphic var. debilis principally by the precarious character of unarmed stems, but the growth-habit, more evident in the field than in the herbarium, is clearly different.
Near Cuiaba I saw var. debilis (Anderson 11343) and var. vestita (Anderson 11346, both NY) growing together, and at the time it did not occur to me that they could represent forms of one species.
Despite a distinct growth-form, var. vestita is otherwise variable in detail.
Around the margin of the Pantanal in Brazil the foliage is densely pubescent, the capitula are silky and conelike prior to anthesis, and the cauline setae are minutely scaberulous.
In Bolivia the foliage tends to be more thinly pubescent or even glabrescent while the capitula remain silky, but the cauline setae are often smooth.
Less than half the known specimens of var. vestita have grown pods, and it would be premature to claim that the long dense indumentum of the valves will prove a constant feature of the variety. mm, the green or anthocyanic valves thinly setose over each seed, otherwise glabrous.
In cerrado, in seasonally wet campo, and at gallery-margin, near 400 m, known only from the sources of rio das Mortes between Xavantina and Barra do Gargas, lat. 14°30'-16°S in s.-e. Mato Grosso, BrazU.-Fl.
IV-VI. Map 53.
I have long hesitated over the taxonomic rank appropriate to this strange mimosa, which is unlike any other member of its subseries in having square stems and triquetrous, ventrally bisulcate leaf-stalks.
In color and shape of leaflets the foliage of var. amnis-mortium suggests M. velloziana, but the plant is less densely prickly and the small hispid pod is precisely that of M. debilis.
The venation of the leaflets is almost that seen in M. nuda var. glaberrima, but the marginal nerve is attenuated between setiform cilia and does not form a continuous homy rim.
326e. Mimosa debilis Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow var. amnis-mortium Bameby, var. nov., a caeteris speciei suae varietatibus (necnon ab omnibus speciebus M. sensitivae arete affinibus) caulibus tetragonis, angulis antrorsus setulosis parce retro-aculeatis et intervallis planis glabris, petiolisque trigonis dorso carinatis ventre depressis bisulcatis diversa; foliolis lanceolato-ellipticis M. vellozianam revocans, sed legumine parvo setaculeato omnino cum M. debili congrua.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso: ±30 km s. of Xavantina, 400 m, 11.
VL1966 (fl, fr mat), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 76996.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, R, US. Leaning or scandent subshrubs 1-2 m, the 4-angular stems forwardly and remotely retroaculeate on angles but glabrous on plane faces, the lfts glabrous or remotely ciliate along midrib; leaf-stalks 2.5-6.5 cm, trigonous, keeled dorsally, flattened and shallowly bisulcate ventrally; lfts of distal pair obliquely lance-eUiptic or ellipticacuminate 3-6 X (0.6-)0.7-2 cm, 3-5 times as long as wide, the anterior proximal 1ft of each pinna cordate; capitula prior to anthesis moriform, the bracts ±0.6 mm; fl-buds minutely pubemlent; pods 10-17 X 3-4 mm, the replum charged along dorsal and lateral ribs with straight, stramineous purplish-tipped setae to 1.5-3.5(-4) 327.
Mimosa platyphylla Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 85.
1846. —"Camapua in BrazU, Riedel, a single specimen in the Imperial Herbarium, St. Petersburg."
—Holotypus, Riedel 426, collected X-XI. 1826 near headwaters of rio Pardo in centr. Mato Grosso do Sul, LE (2 sheets, in bud only)! = NY Neg. 11672.
Erect, coarsely leafy, functionally herbaceous subshrubs ±4-5(-?) dm, the unarmed, fewbranched stems and ample lfts at once rufoushispid throughout with horizontal or subdeflexed, tapering but at base scarcely dilated setae to 3-4 mm and minutely densely gray-puberulent overall, the inflorescence (seen only in praefloration) a terminal efoliate pseudoraceme of ovoid capitula rising 1 dm or more above foliage.
Stipules firm erect, narrowly lanceolate 7-11 x 1-1.5 mm, several-nerved, setose dorsally like stem, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 6-7.5 cm, near middle 1-1.3 mm diam.; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis including pulvinus 12-20 mm, the one interfoliolar segment 9-12 mm; lfts 2-jug., but the inner 1ft of proximal pair reduced to a small paraphyllidium, the slightly smaller proximal pair 5- 7 mm distant from an unequal pair of lanceolate paraphyllidia 2-7 mm, the blade of all lfts obliquely obovate-cuneate ±5-7 x 3.5-4 cm, obtuse but apiculate by excurrent, moderately displaced, forwardly arched midrib, all 6-7- nerved from pulvinule, the outer primary nerves short, one inner one incurved-ascending ± to mid-blade and pinnately branched on its exterior side, the midrib pinnately 7-10-branched on each side, the secondary nerves all anastomosing with the slender continuous, coarsely densely setoseciliate marginal nerve.
Peduncles mostly 3 per node, becoming at least 2 cm, not seen mature; capitula prior to anthesis ovoid cone-like 7-8 mm diam.; bracts linear-lance-attenuate ±4 x 0.8 mm, naviculate at base, abruptly incurved 1 mm above base, 1-nerved, dorsally puberulent, the margin densely pectinate-setose, the fl-buds gray-puberulent;y/ow^rs 4-merous 4-androus, not seen expanded; calyx in bud scarcely 0.2 mm, the rim shortly weakly setulose.
In unrecorded environment but to be expected in cerrado, known only from the type-collection, from the Pardo valley in centr. Mato Grosso do Sul, BrazU.-H. (IX-)XII-? Mimosa platyphylla is known to me only from the immature type, which I have not matched with any modem collection.
The aspect, pubescence and puberulent flowers suggest an amply foliate phase of M. debilis var. vestita, but the secondary veins of the leaflets run out to anastomose with the continuous marginal nerve, as in M. nuda var. glaberrima.
In these respects M. platyphylla is morphologically ambiguous between M. debilis and M. nuda, and its taxonomic evaluation must perforce await discovery of mature flowers and fruits.
328.
Mimosa nuda Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 362.
1841.—Typus infra sub var. nuda indicatur.
Functionally herbaceous subshrubs from a xylopodium or knotty root-crown surmounting 1 or more, slenderly fusiform woody roots, the stems weakly procumbent, assurgent, virgately erect, or rarely (when crowded) sarmentose, at maturity (2-)4-14(-17) dm taU, either (commonly) unarmed or the subterete intemodes with a few random recurved aculei 0.5-2 mm, in all parts variable in indumentum, the stems either a) hispidulous with weak spreading sordid setae less than 1 mm mixed or not with minute puberulence and sometimes in addition minutely granular, or b) more coarsely hispid with erect mfescent setae to l-3(-5) mm mixed or not with pubemlence, or c) fully glabrous, the ordinarily ample lfts, either beneath or on both faces, either a) ascending-setose and finely pilosulous, or b) simply ascending-setose, or c) simply pilosulous, or d) glabrous overall or only on those surfaces concealed in attitude of sleep, the continuous, often shallowly crenate, corneous margin of blades with either uniseriate or more numerous pluriseriate, forwardly appressed setae 0.5-2 mm, or (less often) esetose smooth, the faces of lfts bicolored, when dry brown and sometimes glaucescent above, paler brown beneath, the globose or subglobose capitula l-2(-3)-nate in distal Ifaxils and forming, in early to late anthesis, a simple or few-branched pseudoraceme exserted (0.5-)l-2 dm beyond expanded lvs, the stems and foliage alike often exuding when cut a pallid latex.
Stipules erect firm, lanceolate or lance-attenuate (2-)4-ll X 0.6-1.8 mm, coarsely 3-5- nerved, either glabrous or setulose dorsally, glabrous within, except in var. nuda pectinately ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (1.5-)2-9(-l 1) cm, widely shallowly sulcate ventrally, at middle 0.5- 1.4 mm diam., at very base comeously thickened next to livid wrinkled pulvinus, espiculate at apex; rachis (including pulvinus) of the single pair of pinnae (5-)7-20 mm, the shorter first pair of lfts a little below middle, the paraphyllidia Unearlanceolate or narrowly ovate (0.5-) 1^(-5) X 0.2- 0.8 mm; lfts 2-jug., the distal pair larger, the anterior 1ft of proximal pair reduced to a paraphyllidium or very small ovate-acuminate blade, the distal lfts in outline obliquely obovate, oblong-obovate or lunately broad-elliptic to narrowly oblong or linear, consequently widest near or beyond mid-blade, all semicordate at base, commonly obtuse but abruptly apiculate or mucronate, those of ampler lvs (ll-20-)25-94 x 3-30(-36) mm, 1.8-5 times as long as wide, 3- 5-nerved from pulvinus, the ± excentric midrib giving rise on each side to 4-8 secondary nerves anastomosing with the continuous marginal nerve, the venation dorsally discolored and prominulous, ventrally less so or fully immersed.
Peduncles (9-) 12-45(-80) mm; capitula 5-7 mm diam. without filaments, prior to anthesis moriform or hispid with shortly projecting bracts, these linear or linear-attenuate 1-3 x 0.2-0.6 mm, glabrous and stongly carinate dorsally, commonly pectinately ciliolate but the cilia sometimes suppressed; fl-buds obovoid, nearly always glabrous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some or many lower ones of any capitulum staminate; calyx 0.2-0.3 mm; corolla narrowly vaseshaped (2-)2.3-3.5 mm, the ovate, concave but not strongly cucullate, prominently carinate lobes 0.6-1.2 X 0.5-0.7 mm; filaments free or obscurely united into a stemonozone below the ovary, distally pink or rose-purple sometimes fading whitish, exserted 6.5-9.5 mm.
Pods ± 3 - 20 per capitulum, sessile, piano-compressed, in profile linear or (when short) ovate-oblong or lance-acuminate (7-)l 1-24 x 4-5.5 mm, at apex triangular or acuminate, the shallowly undulate or straight replum 0.5-1 mm wide, the papery valves low-colliculate over 2-5(-6) seeds, when fully ripe brown lustrous, subresinous or pruinose, either separating entire from replum or erraticaUy fissured transversely (especially near replum) into articles 3-5 mm long, the replum and valves alike hispid overall with erect yellow setae to 1-3 mm (and rarely in addition puberulent-pilosulous), or the replum alone hispid and the valves smooth, or (var. nuda) smooth overall; seeds ±3.5-4 x 2.5-3 mm, plumply compressed-obovoid, sometimes subcarinate around long circumference, the testa lustrous brown.
The complex series of forms here assembled under the title of M. nuda appear collectively to represent progressive adaptations of an ancestral "Sensitiva" resembling M. debilis to campo and cerrado habitats on the Brazilian Planalto and in floristicaUy related parts of Bolivia, Paraguay and Argentina.
They exhibit modifications characteristic of functionally herbaceous subshrubs adapted to a hot dry season and intermittent campo fires: woody roots or xylopods; stems renewed annually from the ground but varying in attitude from humifuse to erect and wandlike, but even when crowded only incipiently sarmentose; sclerosis of leaf-blades and stiffening of their venation; and loss of aculei along with loss of sarmentose growth-form.
In progressive narrowing of the leaflet-blades and in progressive loss of hispid or villosulous indumentum, the variation in M. nuda follows paths parallel to those described for M. debilis.
The whole range of leaflet shape encountered in M. nuda as defined herein is wider than in all other members of subser. Mimosa combined and, as the pubescence of leaves and pods is independently labile, the combinations of actually-observed and potential character-states are seemingly endless.
One looks vainly for differential characters in the flower and the pod, for these are as uniform in size and stmcture as those of M. debilis.
Bentham proposed within the megaspecies M. nuda four specific and one varietal taxa, each of them based on a single collection that displayed a particular syndrome of characters in the foliage, indumentum, or both.
These now can be seen as random selections from a then unforeseeable pool of minor variants.
In these circumstances exact definitions of M. nuda and its varieties cannot be expected, and a distinction between a glabrous "M. obtusifolia''^ and a pubescent "M. rixosa" proposed by Burkart (1948: 211, 214) for Argentina populations of M. nuda is impossible to maintain in Paraguay or Brazil.
The key that follows makes no provision for troublesome intermediate forms already known or for others surely to be expected.
During several years of study leading to this account of M. nuda I have found myself passing from one alternative taxonomy to another without finding satisfaction in any.
At a time when I was still unaware that M. glaucescens Bentham was a posterior homonym, I used, in annotation of specimens that long ago passed out of my hands, several unpublished trinomials based on this name.
Key to varieties of M. nuda Plants varying from densely hispid, and armed or not, to almost glabrous, but the stipules and the marginal nerve of lfts setose-ciliate.
2.
Lfts ovate, obovate, or elliptic, but not over 3 times as long as wide.
3.
Pod charged on replum and often on valves also with erect setae.
4.
Larger lfts 3-7-(9.5) x 1.3-3(-3.6) cm; stems either weakly assurgent or virgately erect, at maturity 5 dm long or longer; widespread over s.-e. Brazil, n.-e., Argentina, Paraguay, and s.-e. Bolivia, highly variable in vesture and armament 328a. var. glaberrima (p. 555).
4.
Larger lfts 1-2 x 0.6-0.9 cm; stems weak and slender, only 2-4 dm; local in centr. Paraguay and Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil 328b. var. gracilipes (p. 555).
3.
Pod perfectiy smooth and glabrous; scattered from centr. Goias, Brazil w.-ward into Bolivia.
.
328c. var. ramosa (p. 556).
2.
Lfts narrowly elliptic 30-50 x 6-11 mm, ±5 times as long as wide; local in centr. Goias, Mato Grosso, and n. Paraguay 328d. var. angusta (p. 557) Plants glabrous throughout and unarmed: lfts varying from linear-elliptic to broadly elliptic, rarely semiovate; relatively common in Mato Grosso do Sul, w. just into Bolivia, e. to s. Goias, w. Minas Gerais, centr. S. Paulo, n. into s. Mato Grosso 328e. var. nuda (p. 558) 328a. Mimosa nuda Bentham var. glaberrima (Chodat & Hassler) Bameby, comb. nov. M. velloziana var. glaberrima Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 486 (=P1. hassler.
400).
1904.—"[Paraguay:] .
.
. in campis pr. Tobaty .
.
. [Hassler] n. 3550."
—Holotypus, G! M. glaucescens Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4:362.1841, nom. illeg.—"Rio Pardo [Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil, Riedel, commun.] Langsdorff.'"— )^olotyT£>\xs, Riedel 54, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 7776.-Non M. glaucescens (Willdenow) Poiret, Encycl. meth.
Suppl. 1:61.
1810.
M. velloziana var. genuina fma hispida Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4:486 (=P1. hassler.
400).
1904.—"[Paraguay:]... in campis pr. Pirebebuy.
.
. [Hassler] n. 6786."-Holotypus, G! M. velloziana var. malmeana Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. BoissierII, 4:487 (= PI. hassler.
401).
1904.- "[Paraguay:]... in campis San Bernardino, [Hassler] n. 3778."-Holotypus, G!; isotypus, NY! M. velloziana var. malmeana fma acutifolia Chodat & Hassler, 1904, U.cc—"[Paraguay:].. . in arenosis pr. Valenzuela .. . [Hassler] n. 7041."-Holotypus, G!; isotypus, NY! M. velloziana var. atrostipulata Chodat & Hassler, 1904, U.cc.-"[Paraguay:] ... in regione cursus superioris fluminis Apa . .. [Hassler] n. 8238."—Holotypus, G!; isotypus, NY! M. velloziana var. inermis Chodat & Hassler, 1904, U.c—"[Paraguay:]... in campis pr. San Estanislao, [Hassler] n. 4263."-Holotypus, G!; isotypus, NY! M. velloziana var. guaranitica Chodat & Hassler, 1904, U.cc.-"[Paraguay:] ... in campis pr. flumen Capibary .. . [Hassler] n. 5921."-Holotypus, G! M. viscosa [lapsu pro rixosa] var. inermis Chodat & Hassler, 1904, U.cc—"[Paraguay:]... in campis pr. San Estanislao.
.
. [Hassler] n. 4263b."—Holotypus, G! M. viscosa [lapsu pro rixosa] var. inermis fma glabrifolia Chodat & Hassler, 1904, U.cc-"[Paraguay:] ... in regione fluminis Jejui-guazu .
.
. [Hassler] n. 5715 ... pr. Igatimi . .. n. 5531."—Lectotypus, Hassler 5715, G!; Syntypus, 5531, G! M. glaucescens sensu Bentham, 1875: 391, 1876: 307.
M. rixosa sensu Burkart, 1948: 211, fig. 37; non Martius.
M. obtusifolia sensu Burkart, 1948: 214, fig. 38; non WiUdenow.
Stems 5 dm or longer, either procumbent, or assurgent, or virgately erect, either aculeate or not; vesture of stems and lvs variable as described for the species, but the stipules and the corneous Ift-margin always setose-ciliate and at least the replum of the pod, often both replum and valves, hispid-setose; lfts commonly obovate, sometimes oblanceolate, the longer ones at least 3 cm.
In campo or cerrado, 300-1100 m, widespread over the Brazilian Planalto from s. Goias (and Distrito Federal, where frequently collected) and immediately adj. Minas Gerais, w. through far n.-w. S. Paulo, e. and s. Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso do Sul to Paraguay and e. Bolivia, s. in Brazil through w. Parana to Misiones and n. Corrientes in Argentina.—Fl. most freely XI-IV, sporadically thereafter, the fmits sometimes long persisting.
Map 54.
As here envisaged, var. glaberrima is a heterogeneous assemblage of minor variants that I have been unable to sort into smaller, more exactly defined units credibly correlated with dispersal.
The nucleus of the variety consists of plants with assurgent stems and with leaflets girdled by a strong corneous margin bearing a single file of setae.
Plants habitally similar but with weaker leaflet-rim bearing pluriseriate setae on back and sides pass gradually into M. debilis.
Especially in Mato Grosso do Sul a virgately erect habit of growth, but associated with leaflets varying from broadly obovate to narrowly oblong-eUiptic, suggests passage into vars. angusta and nuda.
A form local in eastem Mato Grosso with narrowly obovate or oblance-elliptic leaflets leads into var. angusta.
328b. Mimosa nuda Bentham var. gracilipes (Harms) Bameby, stat. nov. M. gracilipes Harms in O. Kuntze, Revis. gen. pi. 3(2): 67.
1898. —"Concepci6n, Paraguay."
—Holotypus, O. Kuntze s.n.,
collected in XI.1892, ^B; isotypus, NY! M. nuda fma minor Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 487.
1904.-"[Paraguay:] ... in regione cursus superioris fluminis Apa, Sept. [Hassler] n. 8511."-Holotypus, G! M. gracilipes var. suffruticosa Hassler fma inermis Hassler, Repert.
Spec Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 557.
1910, MIMOSA NUDA (in part) var. GLABERRIMA 101 (kai If) jot MAP 54.
Parts ofplanaltine Brazil, Paraguay, and n.-e. Argentina.
Range ofM niuia Bentham var. glaberrima (Bentham) Bameby. nom. superfl.-"Paraguay: In arenis in regione cursus superioris fluminis Paraguay [sic].. .
Hassler no. 8511."—Holotypus, the same as for the preceding, G! M. gracilipes var. suffruticosa fma armata Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 557.
1910.-"Paraguay: In glareosis pr. Villa Rica .
.
.
Hassler no. 8838."-Holotypus, G! A diminished version of var. glaberrima, with decumbent few-forked stems 2-4 dm, less than 1.5 mm diam., usually armed with remote aculei 0.5-1.5 mm and glabrous except for weakly setose-ciliate stipules and If-margins, but aculei sometimes lacking; lf-stks 1.5-4 cm; distal lfts narrowly obovate or semi-obovate 11-20 x 6- 9 mm, the secondary nerves weakly confluent with marginal nerve; peduncles 1.5-4 cm; capitula without filaments ±4.5 mm diam.; pod of var. glaucescens, the replum hispid with erect setae to ±2.5 mm, the valves glabrous.
In open stony campo and about rock outcrops below 400 m, scattered along the middle Paraguay valley in lat. 19-26°S, from Sa. de Umcum near Commba in Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil, s. in Paraguay through deptos.
Concepci6n and S. Pedro to Guaira.-H. IX-I, IV-V, the full span unknown.
Map 55.
A weakly differentiated form, which Burkart (1948: 219, sub M. argentinensi var. saltensi) thought might be referable to his M. obtusifolia, which is equivalent to glabrate phases of M. nuda var. glaucescens of this account.
It is visually striking, however, for dwarf slender stature, and is now known to have a coherent range of dispersal.
328c. Mimosa nuda Bentham var. ramosa (Bentham) Bameby, comb. nov. M. glaucescens var. ramosa Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): MAP 55.
Planaltine Brazil with adjoining parts of Bolivia and Paraguay.
Range of varieties of M. nuda Bentham other than var. glaberrima.
308.
1876.—"Habitat ad Rio Bagagem, provinciae Goyaz [=upper Tocantins valley near 14°S]:Po/z/."-Holotypus, Pohl 1995, W!; isotypus, NY! Resembling virgately erect phases of var. glaberrima in setose-ciliate stipules and setose Iftmargin, but stems paniculately branched distally and;70<icompletely smooth and glabrous, as that of var. nuda; larger distal lfts obliquely or subdimidiately ovate or elliptic-oblanceolate ±2.5- 4 X 1-2 cm, ±2-2.5 times as long as wide.
In campo, probably near or above 800 m, typically developed only in upper Tocantins vaUey between 13°30' and 14°30'S in centr. Goias (w. slope of Sa.
Geral do Parana w. to Sa.
Dourada n.-w. of Niquelandia).-H. IV-VI(-?).
Map 55.
From present evidence var. ramosa appears to flower in the dry season.
328d. Mimosa nuda Bentham var. angusta (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. angusta Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker)4: 362.
1841.-"Goyaz; Gardner, n. 3131."—Holotypus, collected at Natividade in 1839-1840, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 7777; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 7296! E! F! = F Neg. 54805, G! NY! P! W! Stems slender terete, apparently diffuse or humifuse, unarmed or randomly aculeate, the whole plant glabrous except for setose-ciliate stipules and lfts, these commonly pinkish-glaucescent; leaf-stalks very slender 4.5-11 cm; pinna-rachises 5-12 mm; 3 lfts of each pinna linear-elliptic from semicordate base, abruptly acuminate, the larger ones 3-5 x 0.6-1.1 cm, 4.5-5.7 times as long as wide, the anterior 1ft of proximal pair either ovate-acuminate to 5-6 mm or reduced to a paraphyllidium; capitula without filaments ±5 mm diam.; pod of var. glaberrima.
In unrecorded habitats, to be expected in stony, perhaps seasonally moist campo at ±300-800 m, known from few scattered stations in centr. Goias (Natividade), e. Mato Grosso (Sa. do Roncador), and apparently disjunct on e. tributaries of rio Paraguai in Paraguay (prov. Concepci6n).-H. XII-IV. Map 55.
This may prove to be little more than an extreme narrow-leaflet variant of var. glaberrima, but is still poorly known.
328e. Mimosa nuda Bentham var. nuda.
M. nuda Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens, str. —"Brazil, Po/z/."-Holotypus, Pohld.1418 = 2731, collected V.1820 "inter Joao Diaz et Gregorio Nunez [=n. of the present Caldas Novas in s. Goias], K!; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54851, M! = F. Neg. 6191, NY! W! M. gymnoloma Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 5: 85.
1846.—"Camapua [=Camapua, Mato Grosso do Sul], Rieder^-Holotypus, Riedel 427, K(hh.
Benth.)! = NY Neg. 7779.
M. nuda & M. gymnoloma sensu Bentham, 1875: 392, 1876: 308.
Resembling virgately erect forms of var. glaberrima in all respects except for perfectly smooth, eciliate stipules and Ift-margin, and the pod also naked of setae; variable in outline of lfts, these commonly linear or broadly linear, sometimes oblong, rarely obliquely obovate or obliquely lance-ovate, the larger distal pair (2.2-)3-10 times as long as wide.
In stony or red sandy soils of campo sujo and cerrado, 500-1050 m, intermptedly widespread over Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil, e. to s. Goias, far s. Minas Gerais, and centr. S. Paulo, n. just into Mato Grosso (Chapada dos Guimaraes), and n.-w. into e. Bolivia (Chiquitos, a broad-lvd form).—Fl.
XII-IV, the pods long persistent.
Map 55.
Mimosa gymnoloma is here interpreted as an extreme narrow-leaflet form of var. nuda, hardly two specimens of which are exactly alike in leaflet outline.
329.
Mimosa acapulcensis B. L. Robinson, Bot. Gaz. (Crawfordsville) 28: 135.
1899.-"Common on hills near Acapulco [Guerrero], Mexico, where coUected by Dr. Edward Palmer between October 1894 and March 1895, no. 296."-Holotypus, GH!; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54779, MICH! NY! US! Slender macrophyllidious shrub said to attain 3 m, the flexible terete homotinous branches randomly armed on some nodes with stout woody, gently recurved aculei 2-7 mm, glabrous throughout, the subcoriaceous livid-glaucescent or dorsally dull brown lfts smoothly continuously callous-marginate, the small globose capitula mostly fasciculate by 2-6, forming long, proximally foliate but distally efoliate pseudoracemes terminal to branches.
Stipules firm, broadly subulate 1.5-2.5 mm, faintly 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 3-5.5 cm, espiculate;/7//2- nae 1-jug.; lfts 2-jug., the anterior member of proximal pair very small or suppressed; distal lfts lanceor ovate-elliptic acute 3-8(-10) x 1- 3.5 cm, 3-4-nerved from pulvinule, the slightly displaced midrib pinnately branched, the posterior nerves short.
Peduncles 2-4 cm; capitula without filaments 5-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx glabrous 0.5- 0.6 mm, the rim shortly, sometimes asymmetricaUy toothed; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.3- 2.8 mm, the scarcely thickened 1-nerved lobes glabrous; filaments pink, obscurely united at very base, exserted 4.5-7 mm; ovary short-stipitate, glabrous.
Pods 1-6 per capitulum, the body in profile undulately linear 20-43 x 6-7 mm, cuneately contracted into a stipe ±5 mm, (2-)3-5- seeded, glabrous overall, the elliptic biconvex, free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 7-9 mm long. On rocky hillsides near or below 100 m, known only from the vicinity of Acapulco, Guerrero, Mexico, where first collected in 1791 by Thaddaeus Haenke (s.n.,
PRC!).
Mimosa acapulcensis is instantly distinguished from all Mexican mimosas with the simplified leaf-formula of subser. Mimosa by complete lack of trichomes, the leaflet-margin being callousmarginate but eciliate.
Loss of indumentum combined with foliage of brown-glaucescent hue is reminiscent of Brazilian M. nuda var. nuda, but this is a smaller, functionally herbaceous, unarmed subshmb, has 3-5-nerved stipules, and a sessile fmit.
On account of the distinctive leafformula it is convenient to associate M. acapulcensis with subser. Mimosa, but I think it questionably derived from the same immediate lineage as M. albida and its close kindred.
In habit and coloration it appears close especially to conjugate-pinnate forms of Af. caerulea, with which it agrees also in the nearly straight prickles.
The transition in one and the same plant between pinnae with one and a half pairs of leaflets, the trademark of subser. Mimosa, and pinnae with two and a half pairs occurs in M. goldmanii of subser. Lactifluae, and the step to stabilization of the lower leaflet-number seems but a small one.
330.
Mimosa sousae R. Grether, Phytologia 48: 349 ± fig. 1981.-"Mexico.
Oaxaca: 2 km W of Salina Cmz, District of Tehuantepec.
Sousa 9507, Sept. 19, 1978."-Holotypus, MEXU (not seen); isotypus, NY! Slender unarmed macrophyllidious shrubs, when not dwarfed by wind-exposure attaining 1.5 m, the homotinous stems and stiff broad lfts densely pallid-strigose overall with narrowly ascending scabemlous setae to ± 1 mm, the globose capitula 1-3 together in the axil of upper lvs; no brachyblasts.
Stipules firm, linear-subulate or lanceolate 3-6 mm, nerveless extemally.
Petioles (1-)2-2.5(-7) cm; rachis of 1 pair of pinnae 1- 2(-4) cm; lfts 2-jug., the anterior member of first pair very small or lacking, the distal pair broadly elliptic-obovate or suborbicular, rarely oblongelUptic, mucronulate or subacute, 2-4(-7) x 1.4- 2.5(-4.5) cm, commonly ±1.5 times as long as wide, 3-nerved from pulvinule, the moderately displaced midrib pinnate, the slender continuous marginal nerve densely setose-ciliolate.
Peduncles 2.5-6 cm; capitula without filaments ± 8 mm diam.; flowers (ex char.) 4-5(-6)-merous, haploor some diplostemonous; calyx paleaceous 1.5- 2 mm; corolla 3-4 mm, the lobes barbellate at apex; filaments pink, free, exserted 7-8 mm.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, erect, stipitate, the stipe 2- 10 mm, the body narrowly oblong in profile, (2-)3-5(-6) X 0.9-1.2(-1.3) mm, densely hispid overall with erect subcontiguous scabemlous setae 2-3 mm tapering and antrorsely curved distally; seeds (1-)2-5, ± 5-6.5 mm.
In shallow igneous soil of rocky hills overlooking the Pacific Ocean, 20-100 m, very local in vicinity of Salina Cmz, Oaxaca, Mexico.—Fl.
VI-?; fr.
IX-II. A most remarkable plant, notable in subser. Mimosa for the indumentum of scabemlous setae that, in the words of the describer, "give an ochre-yellow tonality to the leaflets and fmits," for lack ofaciUei, for partly diplostemonous flowers, and for broad, stipitate craspedia.
No close relative is known; but a derivation from its neighbor M. deamii of subser. Lactifluae deserves consideration.
E(ii.6).
Series MIMOSA subser. PEDUNCULOSAE (Bentham) Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Pedunculosae (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. Mimosa sect. Eumimosa ser. Pedunculosae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 370.
1841, ex parte, quoad sp. typicam, caeteris exclusis.—Sp. lectotypica: M. flagellaris Bentham.—Non sect. Ameria ser. Pedunculosae bentham, 1841, op. cit.: 410.
1842.—M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Pedunculosae *Elagellares Bentham, 1841, I.e., quoad sp. typicam, caeteris exclusis.
M. ser. Pedunculosae sensu Bentham, 1875: 399, minori ex parte, omnibus praeter typum exclusis.
Functionally herbaceous from woody root or short caudex, the stems either erect, or ascending, or humifuse, unarmed except in 2 vars. of M. brevipetiolata; stipules mostly 3-9-, in some M. petraea 1-, in M.ftlipetiola striately many-nerved; lf-stks 1.5-45 mm, spiculate at tip; lfts of longer pinnae mostly 10-70-jug. small (12 mm or less), in M. flagellaris 4-8-jug and to 10-28 mm; inflorescence of globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula most often axillary to contemporary or immediately hysteranthous lvs, in M. oligophylla pseudoracemose and far exserted; calyx usually minute (0.1-0.4 mm) and glabrous or almost so, sometimes asymmetric in M. flagellaris and incipiently pappiform to 0.7 mm long in some M. alleniana; filaments free; dehiscence craspedial.
Spp. 10, of campo habitats in the Parana and Paraguai basins, most abundant and diverse in s. Paraguay and adj. Brazil and Argentina (s. to Entre Rios), one e. to e.-centr. S. Paulo, one in high campo of e. Parana and adj. Sta. Catarina.
The core of subser. Pedunculosae consists of the first six species listed in the following conspectus: small, functionally herbaceous mimosas of campo habitats in Paraguay and adjoining countries, distinguished by spiculate leaf-stalks and mostly or entirely axillary peduncles.
They are essentially compatible with subser. Polycarpae except that prickles are lacking in all but two small varieties ofM. brevipetiolata; and they could perhaps advantageously be united to that subseries.
To this nucleus has been added the somewhat isolated M. oligophylla, which is aberrant in its wandlike growth-habit and exserted pseuand Obstrigosae, combined with peculiar striate doraceme, suggestive of a nexus with subser. stipules.
Finally M. flagellaris and M. caingUenBrevipedes (or even subser. Dolentes) yet insepsis, the former bringing with it, as a result of arable from M. uninervis; and the ambiguous lectotypification, the often inappropriate subserlittle M. filipetiola, which has thinly retrostrigose ial epithet Pedunculosae, might be interpreted as stems suggesting a nexus with subser. Sparsae macrophyllidious counterparts of M. leimonias.
Conspectus of subser. Pedunculosae Mimosa * Capitula axillary to coeval or to immediately hysteranthous lvs; microphyllidious (lfts not over 12 mm); no retrorse setae; stipules (1-)3-9-nerved.
331. alleniana Morong 332. brevipetiolata Burkart a. var. hirtula (Burkart) Bameby b. var. pilosula (Burkart) Bameby c. var. brevipetiolata d. var. pauperoides (Burkart) Bameby e. var. rojasiana (Hassler) Bameby 333. pedunculosa M. Micheli 334. petraea Chodat & Hassler 335. leimonias Bameby 336. uninervis (Chodat & Hassler) Hassler ** As *, but capitula in elongate, far exserted, efoliate pseudoracemes.
337. oligophylla M. Micheli *** As *, but macrophyllidious (lfts to 10-25 mm).
338. flagellaris Bentham 339. caingiiensis Burkart **** As *, but stipules striately multinerved; stems thinly retrostrigose.
340. filipetiola Burkart Key to species of subser. Pedunculosae 1.
Plants variable in stature and habit, but either all peduncles axillary to a coeval If or, if some pseudoracemose in praefloration, these subtended by an early hysteranthous If; stems commonly less than 6 dm; either lfts of longer pinnae less than 40-jug., or petioles less than 2 cm.
2.
Microphyllidious, the longest lfts 2-12 x 1.5-4 mm; stems various, but when pliantly humifuse the peduncles less than 5 cm.
3.
Stems bifacial and thinly strigose with retrorsely appressed setae; stipules striately ±20-nerved; rare sp. of upland campo in s.-e. Parana and adj. Sta. Catarina 340.
M. filipetiola (p. 570).
3.
Stems terete or almost so, not retrostrigose; stipules l-7(-9)-nerved.
4.
Lfts of longer pinnae 8-30-jug., discontinuously setose-ciliate, not coarsely pallid-marginate in dorsal view.
5.
Midrib of lfts coarsely prominulous dorsally, pallid, and (3-)4-6-branched on each side, the secondary branches V-forked within the margin 331.
M. alleniana (p. 561).
5.
Midrib of lfts slender dorsally and simple or few-branched, the secondary branches not forked.
6.
Diminutive diffuse shrublets with lf-stks only 1-4.5 mm, longer pinnae 10-19 mm, larger lfts only 2-3 mm, and peduncles 5-9 mm 334.
M. petraea (p. 565).
6.
FunctionaUy herbaceous subshmbs of variable habit, but the peduncles 1-10 cm; either petioles or pinnae longer than in the preceding and larger lfts 3.5-12 mm.
7.
Plants pliantly humifuse, and the peduncles 2-4 cm, subfiliform; capitula without filaments only ±4 mm diam 335.
M. leimonias (p. 566).
7.
Plants loosely tufted, and the peduncles firm, 1-9 cm; capitula without filaments 5-9 mm diam. 8.
Lf-stks 10-30 mm; stems, lf-stks and faces of lfts glabrous; lfts of longer pinnae 8-14-jug. 333.
M. pedunculosa (p. 564).
8.
Lf-stks 1.5-10 mm; stems, lf-stks and faces of lfts either strigose, or puberulent, or both; lfts of longer pinnae 10-28-jug 332.
M. brevipetiolata (p. 562).
4.
Lfts of longer pinnae 40-70-jug., continuously pallid-marginate, and on dorsal face coarsely paUid-costate 336.
M. uninervis (p. 566).
2.
Macrophyllidious, the lfts 3-15-jug., and the larger ones (10-)11-28 x 3.5-13 mm; stems humifuse and peduncles (5-)6-14 cm.
9.
Lfts of longer pinnae 4-6(-8)-jug., the blades obovate or broadly lance-eUiptic, the longer ones 11-24(-28) X (5.5)-6-13.5 mm, 1.6-2.4(-3) times as long as wide; s. Paraguay, n.-e. Argentina, adj. Brazil and Uruguay, relatively widespread 338.
M flagellaris (p. 568).
9.
Lfts of longer pinnae 9-15-jug., the blades oblong, the longer ones (10-)11-15.5 x 3.5-6 mm, 2.5-3.3 times as long as wide; local in Misiones, Argentina (depto. Cainguas) 339.
M. caingiiensis (p. 569).
1.
Plants erect, wandlike, including inflorescence 6-14 dm, the simple stem few-lvd below middle and passing upward into a permanently efoliate pseudoraceme exserted 3-9 dm above foliage 337.
M. oligophylla (p. 567).
331.
Mimosa alleniana Morong, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 7: 98.
1893.-"[Paraguay:] railroad track between Escota and Caballero ([Morong] 1501)."—Holotypus, a fragmentary unicate collected 20.1 (fr), NY! M. hirsutissima var. pseudodistans Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 488 (=P1. hassler.
402).
1904.—"Paraguay: ... in campo pr. San Estanislao ... [Hassler] n. 4327;.. . pr. Vaqueria Capibari . .. n. 4395; in campo Ipe hu.
Sierra de Maracayu . .. n. 4948; .. . pr. Chololo .
.
. n. 6787; ... pr. Valenzuela, .. . n. 6989 ad formam erectam transiens."
— Syntypi omnes, G!; isosyntypi, 4395, K! NY! W!- M. hirsutissima var. pseudodistans fma decumbens Chodat & Hassler, I.e., nom. superfluum.
M. hirsutissima var. pseudodistans fma erecta Chodat 8L Hassler, op. cU.: 489 (403).
1904.-"[Paraguay:] ... in campo pr. flumen Tapiraguay . .. [Hassler] n. 4308; .. . pr. Igatimi... n. 5553; ... pr. Bellavista (Apa). .. n. 8398."—Syntypi omnes, G!; isosyntypi, 5553, K! NY! W! M. acerba sensu Chodat & Hassler, op. cit.: 551 (407), ex parte (6818, G! NY!); non Bentham.
Small slender unarmed, functionally herbaceous subshrub (0.5-)l-4, perhaps to 6 dm, the few simple or distally few-branched stems 0.8- 1.4 mm diam. at base, diffuse or incurved-ascending from woody rootstock or xylopodium to 1.5 cm diam., the stems, lf-stks and peduncles at once minutely pubemlent and softly pilose with fine spreading-ascending flexuous setae to 1.5-3 mm, the foliage pale-olivaceous subconcolorous, the lfts thinly silky-strigulose on both faces, not or indistinctly and very narrowly pallid-marginate, on dorsal face coarsely pallid-venose, the small globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula axUlary to coevally expanding lvs, early becoming lateral and surpassed by associated If Stipules erect subherbaceous, narrowly lanceolate or lance-oblong (2.5-)3.5-7 X (0.5-)0.6-1.3 mm, weakly several-nerved, persistent.
Petioles 5-18 mm, at middle 0.4-0.6 mm diam., the ventral groove broad and shallow, bearing at apex an interpinnal spicule 0.6-2 mm; pinnae 1-jug., progressively longer upward along stem, the members of some pairs often of different lengths, the rachis of those near and beyond mid-stem (2-)2.5-6.5(-7.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-2.5(-3) mm; lfts of pinnae near midstem upward (15-)20-29-jug., very gradually decrescent upward from below mid-rachis, the small first pair 0.4-1.6 mm from linear-subulate paraphyllidia 0.6-2 mm, the blades narrowly oblong or obliquely eUiptic-oblong from semicordate base, acute or abmptly deltate-apiculate, the larger ones of a plant (4-)5-8.5 x (I.2-)l.5-2.5 mm, 3-3.9(-4.4) times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath (2-)3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib thick and pallid its whole length or sometimes only beyond middle, displaced to divide blade 1:2-3, from near middle upward pinnately (3-)4-6-branched on each side, the secondary venules coarsely V-forked within the margin, the inner posterior nerve produced to or beyond midblade, there anastomosing with a secondary nerve from midrib, the outer primary very short or obsolete.
Peduncles either solitary or geminate, slender or subcapillary 7-22 mm; capitula without filaments 4-6(-6.5) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid fl-buds not concealed by bracts but often surpassed by emergent bracteal setae; bracts linear 1.6-2.3 mm, glabrous 1-nerved dorsally, distally ciliate with ascending setae to 0.6-1.3 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones small and staminate; calyx including ciUa 0.4-1 mm, the membranous tube 0.2-0.4 mm, its rim with fine cUia 0.2-0.6 mm, some of these occasionaUy subconnate at base, sometimes all subobsolete; corolla narrowly turbinate or funnelform 2.1-2.5 mm, the membranous ovate, shaUowly concave lobes 0.8- 1 X 0.5-0.75 mm, finely minutely pubemlent dorsally; filaments pink, free to base or almost so, exserted 4.5-8 mm.
Pods (few seen) ±2-10 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile undulately narrow-oblong 10-17 x 3-3.5 mm, 3-5-seeded, the replum 0.2-0.3 mm wide, like the thin greenish-stramineous valves hispid overall with slender ascending, microscopically scabemlous setae to ±0.7-1.2 mm, the biconvex, free-falling articles 2.5-3 mm long; seeds (few seen) lentiform ±2.5 X 2 mm, the testa smooth brown.
In campo or campo cerrado, and in disturbed bmsh-woodland, ±250-600 m, of apparently bicentric range: locally common and widespread in Paraguay e. of rio Paraguai and in adj. s.-w. Mato Grosso do Sul; local between 22° and 23°S in e.-centr. S. Paulo (Mogi-gua9u; Ityrapina; Botucatu).—R. YX.-\\.—Dormideira(^.
Paulo); eaten by livestock in Mato Grosso do Sul. Among the all too numerous unarmed genuine mimosas with conjugate pinnae and poorly developed calyx that pullulate in campestrian Paraguay M. alleniana is easily recognized by the coarse pallid venation of the dorsal face of leaflets, and by this feature alone can be distinguished from unarmed forms of M. brevipetiolata.
The leaflet venation is similar in pattem, although more emphatic, to that seen in M. pedunculosa and M. leimonias, but the first of these differs in its peculiar stature, having peduncles nearly as long as the primary cauline axis, the second has on the average smaller capitula, and both have glabrate, not softly pilose, stems and leaf-stalks.
The species was named in commemoration of Dr. Timothy Field Allen (1837-1902), an eminent homeopathic physician in New York City, founding member and for many years vicepresident of the Torrey Botanical Club, and student of Characeae, who contributed to the expenses of Thomas Morong's travel in Paraguay in 1888-1890.
332.
Mimosa brevipetiolata Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 176.
1948.—Typus infra sub var. brevipetiolata indicatur.
Herbs 2-4(-5) dm with usually slender, simple or 1-2-branched (var. rojasiana relatively robust and freely branched) stems diffuse or incurvedascending from a shortly forking subterranean caudex surmounting a fusiformly swoUen root, together with lf-axes and peduncles at once pubemlent and strigose with appressed or narrowly ascending tapering setae to 1.5-2.5 mm, either unarmed or at random nodes armed with a weak infrapetiolar aculeus or at times also with a pair of infrastipular setae or setaculei to 1-2.5 mm, the olivaceous subconcolorous lfts pubemlent or seldom glabrous on both faces and also thinly (densely) strigose-setose beneath, the globose capitula solitary or 2-3 together from the axil of coevally expanding lvs below, at, or mostly beyond mid-stem or (especiaUy in var. hirtula) some in praefloration pseudoracemose and attaining anthesis before full expansion of the associated If.
Stipules lanceolate or Unear-attenuate 2-7 x 0.3-1.5 mm, dorsally either pubescent like stem or glabrate, 3-6-nerved, early dry and brown, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of lvs from mid-stem upward very short, including pulvinus 1.5-10 x 0.4-0.7 mm, the shallow open ventral groove terminating in a glabrous or pubemlent spicule 0.4-3 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the axis of longer ones 2-7.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1-2.4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 10-28-jug., decrescent at both ends of rachis, the first pair 0.5-1.2 mm from subulate paraphyllidia 0.6-1.2 mm, the blades linear or Unear-lanceolate to semi-ovate, at base shallowly semicordate, abmptly acute, those near mid-rachis (4.5-)5-12 x 1-4 mm, 3- 7 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath boldly 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the nerves commonly orange-brown, sometimes pallid, the simple (exceptionally faintly 1-2- branched) midrib displaced to divide blade ± 1: 2, continuously prominulous from base upward, the inner posterior nerve expiring near or well beyond mid-blade, the outer posterior nerve short and weak, often wanting, the margin discontinuously or subcontinuously setose-ciliate, the setae at broadest point 0.05-0.1 mm diam. Peduncles (1-)1.5-7(-9) cm; capitula without filaments 5-9 x 5-7 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, but sometimes hispidulous with emergent bracteal setae; bracts eUiptic-oblong 1.7-2.7 x 0.4-0.8 mm, scarious proximally, 1-nerved, pectinately ciliolate distally;flowers4-merous 4-androus, some proximal ones staminate; calyx-tube membranous, shortly campanulate 0.1-0.25 mm, the tmncate or obscurely denticulate rim glabrous or commonly minutely ciliolate (cilia 0.1- 0.4, exceptionally 0.6 mm); corolla narrowly turbinate or funnelform 2.3-2.8 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave 1 -nerved lobes 0.7-1.1 x 0.5- 0.65 mm, minutely pubemlent dorsally; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 4.5-6.5 mm.
Pods often 10 or more per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately Unear-oblong ±10-21 x 4-5 mm, mostly 3-5-seeded, the shaUowly constricted replum ±0.3-0.4 mm wide, hispid with ascending-divaricate tapering setae 1.5-2 mm, the papery brown, densely pubemlent valves more finely and shortly retrostrigose, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 3.5-5 mm long; seeds not seen fully ripe.
Under the specific title of M. brevipetiolata, originally defined as a tenuously differentiated microspecies narrowly endemic to Misiones, Argentina, I here assemble a series of forms hitherto ascribed, if armed, to ser. Pudicae and, if unarmed, either to ser. Pedunculosae, when all peduncles are obviously axillary even prior to anthesis, or to ser. Meticulosae, when they are at first pseudoracemose but are subtended by a hysteranthous leaf.
Collectively they form what Burkart (1948: 188, in relation to M. oligophylla var. pilosula) termed a nexo de union between these unrealistic serial categories, inherited from Bentham but manifestly artificial.
Characters common to all aspects of M. brevipetiolata are two (or weakly three)-nerved leaflets with essentially simple midrib and one posterior nerve of about the same girth, scarious elliptic floral bracts, a minute calyx, and finely pubemlent corollas.
The relatively uncommon, aculeate var. pauperoides scarcely differs from sympatric M. balansae except in weaker, random prickles and in midrib of leaflets continuously prominent dorsally.
The unarmed varieties differ from M. alleniana in the essentially simple, not strongly arborescentbranched, dorsally prominent and pallid midrib of leaflets, from the tme M. oligophylla in short, usually multifoliolate leaves and in initially or at least hysteranthously leaf-subtended peduncles, and from M. petraea in much larger leaflets and thicker capitula.
The differences between varieties, which are expressed in minor modifications of leaflet-number and pubescence, form a continuum of mutuaUy independent variables.
The range of the species as here defined is, with the exception of poorly understood var. rojasiana (at 23°30'S on rio Paraguai), compressed between 25° and 31°S in southem Paraguay and northeastern Argentina, but it must be expected to occur on the Brazilian side of the Umguai River in western Rio Grande do Sul. For convenience of classification it seems useful to distinguish these varieties of M. brevipetiolata: Key to varieties of M. brevipetiolata 1.
Stems unarmed.
2.
Lfts puberulent dorsally, commonly also ventrally.
3.
Rachis of longer pinnae 3-6 cm and their lfts 16-28-jug. 332a. var. hirtula (p. 563).
3.
Rachis of longer pinnae (1.5-)2-3(-4) cm and their lfts 10-17-jug 332b. var. pilosula (p. 563).
2.
Lfts glabrous on both faces 332c. var. brevipetiolata (p. 564).
1.
Stems armed at random nodes with 1-3 weak aculei or setaculei.
4.
Stems slender 1-1.5 mm in greatest diam.; larger lfts 4-9 x 0.9-1.9 mm 332d. var. pauperoides (p. 564).
4.
Stems relatively stout, 2-3 mm diam.; larger lfts 9-12 X 1.7-2.3 mm 332e. var. rojasiana (p. 564).
332a. Mimosa brevipetiolata Burkart var. hirtula (Burkart) Bameby, comb. nov. M. petraea var. hirtula Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 174, fig. 28(Pe), lam. 21.
1948.-"Argentina.
Misiones: .
.
.
Estaci6n experimental del Ministerio de Agricultura, A. Burkart 15270, 11.11.1945 " —Holotypus, SI (seen only in photo.
I.e.); paratypi, Ekman 1639, MICH! NY! S! M. distans (?) sensu M. Micheli, 1883: 54 (Balansa 1456, G!).
M. acerba ± var. mmor sensu Chodat & Hassler, 1904: 551 (Hassler 2956, G\; 3349, G! P!; 6159, G\; 6818, G! P!; 7977, G!).
Pinnae relatively long, narrow and multifoUolate, as given in key to vars.; larger lfts (4.5-)5- 9 X 1-1.6 mm; capitula often pseudoracemose prior to anthesis, but in fmit all subtended by an expanded If.
In campo, ±100-350 m, locally plentiful around the s. and s.-w. margins of the Paraguayan Plateau s.-ward from 25°S and s. across rio Parana into s. Misiones and n. Corrientes, Argentina.—n. IX-III. 332b. Mimosa brevipetiolata Burkart var. pilosula (Burkart) Bameby, comb. nov. M. oligophylla var. pilosula Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 188, fig. 31(vP).
1948.-"Argentina.
Corrientes: La Cmz, Burkart 8130, 12.
XII.36 " - Holotypus, SI (not seen); paratypus e loc. class.,
Ibarrola 1820, NY! Like var. hirtula, but pinnae shorter and lfts fewer, as given in key to vars.; peduncles developing with or after the subtending If, thus not or only transiently pseudoracemose.
In low-lying campo and waste places along highways and in pastures, ± 100-200 m, locally common in the Umguai Basin in Corrientes and Entre Rios, Argentina, discontinuously n. through s. Misiones into s. Paraguay (n. to Asuncion).— Fl. spring onward.
332c. Mimosa brevipetiolata Burkart var. brevipetiolata.
M. brevipetiolata Burkart, 1948, I.e., fig. 30, sens, restr.—"Argentina.
Misiones: Martires Brete, entre Cerro Azul y San Javier, A. Burkart 15447, 17.11.1945 "-Holotypus, SI (not seen); isotypus, GH!; paratypus, Montes 836, NY! Essentially like var. hirtula except for glabrous leaflets, the prominent midrib sometimes obscurely branched distally, this suggesting passage toward M. alleniana.
In open grasslands near 200-300 m, known only from s. Misiones, Argentina (deptos.
San Ignacio, Candelaria, Concepci6n, Ap6stoles).— H. X-IV. 332d. Mimosa brevipetiolata Burkart var. pauperoides (Burkart) Bameby, comb. nov. M. balansae var. pauperoides Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 146, fig. 22 vP.
1948.
M. pauperoides (Burkart) Fortunato, Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 76: 381.
1989.-"Argentina.
Corrientes: loc? M. Biraben 5027, 4.
XII.1941.
.
.
. "
- H o - lotypus, LP (not seen).
M. balansaeyar.pauperoides sensuBurkart, 1987:503, fig. 224e-i. Exactly like often sympatric var. pilosula except for weakly aculeate nodes or intemodes, the aculei randomly distributed, sometimes absent from some stems of an otherwise armed plant.
In habitats of var. pilosula, and sympatric with it in the s. part of its range, from specimens known only from between 29" and 31°S in s. Corrientes and n. Entre Rios, Argentina; reported in the protologue from Atlantic Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU.-H. X-IV. This erratically armed mimosa occurs in the common range of M brevipetiolata var. pilosula and M. balansae, from which it may perhaps have acquired weak prickles through introgressive hybridization.
Mimosa paupera, to which it was likened by Burkart, differs not only in lack of prickles but in retrostrigulose corollas.
The record of var. pauperoides from Porto Alegre (Burkart, 1948:146) was confirmed by Fortunato (1989), who considered the taxon to be specifically distinct.
332e. Mimosa brevipetiolata Burkart var. rojasiana (Hassler) Bameby, comb. nov. M. balansae var. rojasiana Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 557.
1910.-"[Paraguay.] Gran Chaco: In campis Santa Rita flor. et fmct. mens. Oct.; Hassler 2355, leg. Rojas."
—Holotypus, G!; isotypi, GH! NY! Resembling var. hirtula in lf-formula and venulation of lfts, and in transiently pseudoracemose inflorescence, but the stems coarser, perhaps weakly frutescent, and armed at random nodes with 1-3 small weak aculei.
In unrecorded habitat, known only from the type-locality on the w. bank of rio Paraguai near lat. 23°30'S in depto Presidente Hayes, Paraguay.-H. X-? This poorly known mimosa appears to have been artificially subordinated to M. balansae because of its few nodal aculei; its foliage and flowers are in full agreement with M. brevipetiolata var. hirtula.
Fortunato (1989: 382) contrarily considered var. rojasiana synonymous with M. balansae.
333.
Mimosa pedunculosa M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 28(7): 55, t. 19.
1883.- "[Paraguay:] Caaguazu in campis; Nov.-Mart.,
[Balansa] n. 1434."
Holotypus, collected xi.l874 (fr), G!; isotypi, F! = F. Neg. 11903, P! Dwarf unarmed microphyllidious herbs 1-1.5 dm from eventually stout woody taproot and shortly forking subterranean caudex, the simple or 1-branched incurved-ascending stems, petioles, peduncles, and both faces of lfts glabrous, the stipules and lfts weakly setiUose-ciliolate, the small globose capitula on peduncle much longer than subtending If, as long as or longer than the cauline axis beyond it, the thin-textured plane olivaceous lfts concolorous, delicately venulose beneath.
Stipules heteromorphic, the lowest short ovate, the upper lanceolate 2-3 x 0.5-0.9 mm, these 5-6-nerved, all persistent.
Leaf-stalks subfiliform 1-3 cm, at middle 0.2-0.3 mm diam., the shallow open sulcus terminating in a weak spicule ±0.5 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 10-25 mm, the interfoliolar segments 1.2-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 8-14 (-15)-jug., little graduated, the first pair 0.5-1.8 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.1-0.6 mm, the blades lance-oblong or oblong-elUptic from obtusangulate or semicordate base, deltately subacute, the larger ones 4-6.3 x 1.2-2 mm, 3.1-3.6 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 3(-^)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, arborescently 2-4-branched near and beyond mid-blade, the branches on posterior side anastomosing with inner posterior primary nerve to form closed areolae, the outer posterior nerve short and weak, the marginal setae ±0.05 mm diam. Peduncles solitary 6-10 cm, from axils below middle of mature stem; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts oblongelUptic, abmptly acuminulate 1-1.5 x 0.6 mm, largely scarious, setiUose-ciliolate near and above middle, otherwise glabrous; flowers 4- or a few 5-merous, 4(-5)-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.2-0.3 mm, the minutely denticulate rim glabrous; corollas narrowly turbinate 2.2-2.9 mm, glabrous, the ovate, shallowly concave, dorsally carinate but scarcely thickened lobes 0.8-1.1 x 0.7-1 mm, papillate at margin; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 4.5-6 mm.
Pods 1-several per capitulum, subsessile, in profile undulately Unear-oblong 14-17 X 3 mm, 4-5-seeded, the replum 0.3-0.4 mm wide, minutely thinly setulose, the papery brownish-stramineous valves at once puberulent and thinly retrostrigulose, when ripe breaking up into free-falling biconvex, individually indehiscent articles 2.5-3 mm long; seeds (few seen) plumply lentiform ±2.2 x 2 mm, the testa fuscous-olivaceous dull.
In campo, 250^00 mm, local on the Paraguayan Plateau between the sources of Jejui-guazu and rio Yhu, lat. 24°-25°S in Paraguay.-R. X-I(-?).
This charming dwarf mimosa is notable for disproportionately long peduncles relative to the short stems.
It appears closely related to M. brevipetiolata, but differs in slender leaf-stalks 10-30 (not 1.5-10) mm long. 334.
Mimosa petraea Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 548 (=P1. hassler.
404).
1904.—"[Paraguay:] in glareosis pr. Chololo in valle fluminis Y-aca, Dec, [Hassler] n. 6619."-Holotypus, G! = F Neg. 28227; isotypi, BM! F! = F Neg. 57262, K! NY! P! W! M. petraea sensu Burkart, 1948: 174, exclus. var. Diminutive diffuse microphyllidious shrublets 1-3 dm, the stems, lf-axes and short axillary peduncles strigose with straight appressed tapering setae to ±0.5-1.3 mm, the small crowded lvs olivaceous subconcolorous, the lfts glabrous and veinless above, beneath either glabrous or microscopically pubemlent and prominently pallid-costate, slenderly discontinuously setose-ciliolate, the few small globose capitula crowded near end of homotinous branchlets on peduncle shorter than subtending If.
Stipules erect, the lowest lanceolate or triangular, the upper Unearattenuate 2-5.5 X 0.3-0.5 mm, 1-3-nerved, glabrous dorsally, weakly ciliolate, persistent.
Leafstalks including scarcely swollen pulvinus 1—4.5 X 0.2-0.3 mm, the inconspicuous shallow ventral groove terminating in a spicule 0.3-0.5 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 10-19 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-0.8 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 15-20-jug., decrescent proximally and less so distally, the first pair 0.3- 0.5 mm distant from minute or sometimes obsolete paraphyllidia, the blades obliquely lanceolate or narrowly ovate from semicordate base, acute, those near mid-rachis 2.2-3 x 0.5-0.9 mm, 3.6-6 times as long as wide, all dorsally 1(- 2)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib prominulous its whole length, displaced to divide blade ± 1:2, a very short posterior nerve sometimes perceptible.
Peduncles solitary, 5-9 mm; capitula without filaments ±4 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but the bract-tips emergent; bracts lance-acuminate 1.6-1.8 mm, the broad membranous claw setose-ciliolate, abmptly acuminate distally; receptacle setulose; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, many proximal ones staminate; calyx membranous 0.3-0.4 mm, the irregularly minutely lobulate rim obscurely ciliolate; corolla 1.6-1.8 mm, the ovate, shaUowly concave, dorsally keeled but scarcely thickened lobes 0.8-1 X 0.4-0.55 mm, microscopically pubemlent extemally; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 4.5-5 mm; ovules 4-5; only galled fruits seen.
About outcrops on stony campo, scattered over the Paraguayan Plateau from deptos Cordillera and Guaira e. to Sa. de Amambay in depto. Alto Paraguay; reported erroneously by Burkart (1948: 174) from Misiones, Argentina (Bonpland, the record discussed by Fortunato, 1989: 387).—Fl.
X-? 335.
Mimosa leimonias Bameby & Fortunato, sp. nov., M. petraeae et M. pedunculosae affinis, a prima caulibus omnino herbaceis (nec basi fmticulosis), pinnis foliolisque longioribus (his 3.5-5.5, nec 2.2-3 mm usque longis), foliolomm costa ultra mediam ramulosa (nec simplici), pedunculisque elongatis 2-4 (nec vix 1) cm longis, a secunda, quoad foliolomm magnitudinem ac venationem comparabili, caulibus elongatis humistratis, pedunculis capillaribus 2-4 (nec 6-10) cm longis caule primario multoties brevioribus, capitulisque minimis absque filamentis 4 (nec 6-7) mm diametientibus diversa.—Paraguay.
Amambay: Villa Sana, zwischen rio Apa und rio Aquidaban, 1.1909 (fl), K. Fiebrig 4863.-Holotypus, GH = NY Neg. 11723; isotypi, P, SI.
Delicately slender unarmed microphyllidious herb from shortly forked caudex, the humifusely radiating stems 1.5^ dm, bearing in most axils, upward from below middle, a leafy brachyblast and 1 or rarely 2 erect capillary peduncles, the stems, lf-stks and peduncles glabrous or only remotely appressed-setulose, the stipules and lfts setulose-ciliolate but otherwise glabrous, the ellipsoid-subglobose capitula very small.
Stipules erect subherbaceous lanceolate 2-3 x 0.6-1 mm, coarsely 3(-5)-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of primary cauline lvs 2-15 x 0.2-0.4 mm, progressively shorter upward along stem, those of brachyblasts mostly 10-15 mm filiform (no further described), the ventral groove shallow open, terminating in a spicule much less than 1 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 2-3 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20-30-jug., progressively more numerous upward along stem, the small first pair 0.5-0.9 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.4 mm, the blades Unear-oblong from deeply obtusangulate base, obtuse apiculate, the longer ones ±3.5-5.5 x (0.7-)0.8-1.3 mm, 3.8-5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath slenderly 3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib dividing blade ±1:2, beyond middle 1-2- branched on each side, the first branch anastomosing with the inner posterior nerve, the outer posterior one very short or obscure, the marginal setae less than 0.1 mm diam. Peduncles 2-4 cm X 0.3 mm; capitula without filaments ±4 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid fl-buds glabrous 4-keeled; bracts oblong-elUptic, abmptly acute 0.9-1.3 x 0.3-0.5 mm, scarious proximally, ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx a fimbriolate-denticulate collar 0.15-0.25 mm long; corollas turbinate 1.5-1.7 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave, dorsally carinate lobes 0.7 X 0.5- 0.6 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 3- 4.5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous; pod unknown.
Creeping among grasses in rich moist campo, at elevation not recorded, known only from the Apa-Aquidaban watershed in depto. Amambay, Paraguay, to be sought in adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, BrazU.-Fl. ±1-11.
Mimosa leimonias is closely related to M. petraea and M. pedunculosa; all three are small, inconspicuously pubescent, unarmed mimosae with much reduced calyx endemic to campos of eastem Paraguay.
Of the three, M. pedunculosa is most easily recognized by its short stems, elongate peduncles and relatively large capitula (without filaments 6-7, not ±4 mm diam.).
Mimosa leimonias and M. petraea are alike in very small capitula but differ, possibly not specifically, in length of leaf-stalks, leaflets and peduncles (as given in the Latin diagnosis) and consequently in gross aspect.
The difference in leaflet-venation described in the diagnosis may be merely a function of leaflet-size, but cannot be ignored at the present stage of our knowledge of this intricate group.
Possibly M. leimonias—the epithet is the Greek equivalent of Latin pratensis—is a lush, herbaceous, mesophytic ecotype of the ordinarily suffhiticulose M. petraea, which is known to occur close by in Sa. de Amambay.
336.
Mimosa uninervis (Chodat & Hassler) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 559.
1910, based on M. papposa var. uninervis Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 551 (=P1. hassler.
407).
1904.-"[Paraguay:]... in campis pr. San Estanislao, Aug. [Hassler] n. 4177;... pr. flumen Tapiraguay, Aug., n. 4290; .
.
. pr. flumen Jejuiguazu, Dec, n. 5736."
— Lectotypus, Hassler 5736, G!; isotypi, GH! K! NY! P! W!; syntypi, 4777, G! 4290, F! = F Neg. 54851, G! NY! W! M. papposa sensu M. Micheli, 1883:56 (Balansa 1457, G! P!); non Bentham.
Slender, stiffly erect unarmed perennial herbs from short caudex and fusiform root, the simple or strictly 1-2-branched, distantly few-lvd terete stem (1.5-)2-8 dm tall, together with lf-stks and axes of inflorescence strigose with smooth, strictly appressed tapering setae to 1.5-2.5 mm, the intemodes immediately preceding first flowering node 4-15 cm, the numerous small thick-textured, closely imbricate, facially glabrous lfts olivaceous veinless above, beneath prominently paUid-costate, pallid-marginate and setose-ciliolate, the plumply ellipsoid or globose capitula solitary or geminate in the axil of coevally expanding lvs and early surpassed by them, sometimes briefly pseudoracemose prior to anthesis but early becoming lateral.
Stipules firm erect, lanceolateor narrowly ovate 2.5-5 x 0.8-2 mm, mostly 5-7-nerved, either glabrous on both faces or dorsally pubemlent, setose-ciliolate.
Leaves ±5-10 per stem, often abmptly accrescent distally, those near base of stem relatively longpetiolate but short-pinnate; petiole of lvs at and above mid-stem 4-14 x 0.4-1 mm, of some lower lvs 2-3 cm (no further described), the terminal spicule 1-2 mm; pinnae 1-jug., ascending from petiole in narrow V, the rachis 4.5-10.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.8-1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (40-)45-70-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.4-1.3 mm distantfi"omnarrowly subulate paraphylUdia 0.5- 1.2 mm, the blades narrowly lanceolate or Unearoblong from semicordate base, those near midrachis 5-8 X 0.8-1.9 mm, ±4.5-5.5 times as long as wide, all dorsally 3-4-nerved from pulvinule and in addition charged on each side, next to or just within the tme margin, with a broad pallid, fowardly setose-ciliolate band, the stout pallid midrib subcentric simple, the inner posterior nerve anastomosing near mid-blade with the intramarginal band, the other primary nerves (sometimes 1 anterior to midrib) very short and weak.
Peduncles (1-) 1.3-4 cm; capitula without filaments 6-8 x 5-6 mm, prior to anthesis moriform but the bracts sometimes shortly emergent between the strongly 4-carinate, minutely pubemlent fl-buds; bracts linear or lance-eUiptic 2- 2.6 X 0.25-0.8 mm, proximally membranousmarginate, strongly 1-nerved, distally ciliolate with setulae to 0.5-0.8 mm; flowers 4-merous, some lower ones small, staminate, and 8-androus, the bisexual ones 4-androus; calyx-tube 0.1-0.2 mm, with minute ciUa 0.25-0.45 mm; staminate corollas turbinate 1.6-2 mm, the bisexual ones narrowly funnelform 2.5-3 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave, scarcely thickened 1 -nerved lobes 0.75-1.1 X 0.65-0.8 mm; filaments pink, free almost to base, those of bisexual fls exserted 5.5- 7 mm.
Pods (little known) few per capitulum, sessile, in profile Unear-oblong 24-30 x ±4 mm, 5-7(-8)-seeded, the slender replum and papery valves densely appressed-setose overall, the dehiscence not seen.
In campo near 300-350 m, localized on the Paraguayan Plateau in lat. ±24°-26°S, and extending e. to the Brazilian slope of Sa. do Amambai in Mato Grosso do Sul.-R. III-IV, VIII, X, XII-I, the full rhythm of flowering unknown.
The few-leaved stem and peculiar venation of the small, numerous, closely imbricated leaflets render M. uninervis unmistakable.
In habit it most closely resembles (and has been collected in company with) M. oligophylla, a taller plant with relatively broad leaflets.
337.
Mimosa oligophylla M. MicheU, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 28(7): 56, pi. 21.
1883.-"[Paraguay.] In pratis humidis, Yag[u]aron, [Balansa] n. 1459; Itape n. 1831; Arroyos y esteros, n. 1831a; Cerro-Peron pr. Paraguari, n. 1465."-Lectotypus, Balansa 1459, G! = NY Neg. 11834.—^.B. syntypus Balansa 1465 = M. pseudopetiolaris.
Slender erect unarmed herbs 6-14 dm from fusiform root and shortly branched caudex, the solitary or few, simple wandlike stems bearing below or to middle ± 3-6 developed lvs, thence passing into a long narrow efoliate pseudoraceme or few-branched panicle of soUtary or mostly geminate, plumply ovoid capitula, the stems, lfaxes and inflorescence strigose with straight, strictly appressed tapering setae to 1-2.5 mm, the olivaceous lfts subconcolorous, the coriaceous lfts glabrous, coarsely pallid-venulose dor- 568 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 sally and setose-marginate, the axis of inflorescence rising 3-9 dm beyond furthest developed If, the capitula maturing in acropetal sequence.
S/zpw/e'^erect, lance-acuminate 2.5-9 x 1-2 mm, glabrous dorsally, thinly setose-ciliate, prominently 7-9-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 1.5- 4.5 cm, at middle 0.6-1.3 mm diam., the shallow open ventral sulcus terminating in an interpinnal spicule 1-2.5 mm; lfts 28-45-jug., subequilong except at base of rachis, the small first pair 1- 1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.5- 1.7 mm, the blades semi-ovate from deeply semicordate base, deltately acute, the longer ones 6-13 X 2-4.5 mm, 2.2-3 times as long as wide, all veinless or almost so above, beneath 4-5- nerved from pulvinule, the stout, continuously prominent midrib displaced to divide blade 1: 2-3, the inner posterior nerve expiring near or beyond mid-blade, the 2 outer posterior and sometimes one weak anterior nerve much shorter, the marginal setae 0.2-0.4 mm diam. in dorsal view, appearing much narrower ventrally.
Peduncles 6-12 mm; capitula without filaments 9- 10 X 7-8 mm, the fl-buds prior to anthesis nearly or quite concealed by pectinately ciliate emergent bracts, these lance-acuminate ±4 mm, at and below middle scarious and ±0.6 mm wide, pectinately setose-ciliate, the tips attenuate, strongly I-nerved, more shortly ciholate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyxtube membranous 0.3-0.4 mm, the subentire rim with fine setulae to 0.3-0.4 mm; corollas narrowly funnelform 2.8-3 mm, the narrowly ovate, shallowly concave, dorsally 1-nerved lobes 0.9 X 0.5 mm, at very tip microscopically pubemlent extemally; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 7-8.5 mm.
Pods usually several per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong (6.5-)9-15 X 3-4.5 mm, (1-)2-4-seeded, the shallowly constricted, forwardly setulose replum ±0.3 mm diam., the papery valves more densely hispid with fine setae, when ripe disjointing into free-falling articles ±4-5(when solitary -6) mm long. In wet campo near 200-300(?) m, apparently local on the Paraguayan Plateau within 25°30'- 26°30'S, 55°30-57°30'W, from depto. Paraguari (Cordillera de Altos, Yaguaron) w. to depto. Caazapa (Tapyta).-n. IX-III(-?).
338.
Mimosa flagellaris Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 372.
1841.—"Near Porto Alegre [Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil], Tweedie; Brazil, ^•^//o."—Lectotypus, Tweedie 69, K(hb. Hook.,
excluding plant at mid-sheet, which = M. dolens var. pubescens)\ = NY Neg. 1804; syntypus, Sello s.n.,
K (plant at left only)! = NY Neg. 1805; presumed isotypi, Sello s.n.,
BM! C! = F Neg. 21878; G! M! Wl-Sello d. 1701, P! and 204, K! W! may be isotypic in part and are in any case characteristic.
M.flagellarisvar. hirsuta Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 324.
1876.-"Cum forma typica legit Tweedie specimina imperfecta."
—Holotypus, mounted with Tweedie 69, K! M.flagellarisstnsuBQntham, 1875:400; Burkart, 1948: 166 (antecedent literature), fig. 27 (optima!); 1987: 503, fig. 226.
Unarmed macrophyllidious, functionally herbaceous subshrubs from stout woody root and shortly branched subterranean caudex, the flexuously humifuse stems l-5(-6) dm, at least when young pilose, like lf-stks and subvertically erect peduncles, with fine sordid or yellowish setae to 2-4 mm often mixed with minute gray pubemlence, the plane chartaceous, subconcolorously olivaceous (bmnnescent), opaque or lustrous, dorsally venulose lfts either glabrous on both faces, or villosulous beneath either overall or only toward margin, or villosulous on both faces and then sometimes in addition finely sparsely setose-strigose beneath, the solitary or exceptionally geminate peduncles much longer than the subtending If.
Stipules erect firm, lanceolate or narrowly ovate, obtuse or subacute, coarsely 3- 6-nerved, dorsally either glabrous or pubemlent, pectinately ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 5-20 (-25) X 0.4-0.75 mm, the shallow open groove terminating in a slender, straight or often forwardly curved, glabrous or pubemlent spicule 0.6-3 mm, this sometimes concealed between pinna-pulvini;/7z>z«a^ 1-jug., the rachis (1.5-)2- 4.5(-5) cm, the interfoliolar segments (4.5-)5-l 1 mm; Ifts commonly (3-)4-6-, locally 5-8-jug., decrescent proximaUy, either the distal or the penultimate pair longest, the very unequal first pair 1-4.5 mm distant from subulate 1-nerved paraphyllidia 0.7-2 mm, the blades obliquely obovate or less often broadly lance-eUiptic from amply semicordate base, either broadly obtuse apiculate or deltately subacute, the larger ones (10-)11.5-24(-28) X (5.5-)6-13.5 mm, 1.6-2.4 (-3) times as long as wide, all beneath coarsely (4-)5-6(-7)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, upward from near middle 3-6-branched on each side, the inner anterior and posterior nerves produced to or much beyond mid-blade, the outer ones shorter, the posterior ones branched on their outer side, all secondary nervules looped within the discontinuously or subcontinuously setose-ciliate margin, the marginal setae 0.1-0.2 mm diam.; a faint tertiary venulation often perceptible.
Peduncles (5-)6-14 cm; capitula without filaments 7-8 mm diam., as long or a little longer, prior to anthesis hispidly conelike; bracts eUiptic-oblong (1.8-)2- 3.5 X 0.5-0.9 mm, largely scarious, 1-nerved, dorsally either glabrous or pubemlent, pectinately ciliate; flowers 4-merous, mostly bisexual and 4-androus, but some proximal ones staminate and some of these at times 8-androus; calyx membranous 0.2-0.55 mm, either symmetrically or asymmetrically campanulate, sometimes reduced to a narrow collar, the rim entire or minutely 4-denticulate, usually glabrous, sometimes randomly minutely ciliolate; corolla funnelform 2.9-3.4 mm, the membranous ovate, shallowly concave 1 -nerved lobes 0.9-1.1 x 0.5- 0.75 mm; filaments lilac-pink or violet, free to base, exserted 5.5-7.5 mm.
Pods usually 10-30 or more per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately Unear-oblong 9-24 x 4-4.5 mm, (2-)3-5- seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.3-0.5 mm diam., hispid along back and sides with crowded or well-spaced divaricate-ascending setae to 1.5-2.5 mm, the papery, glabrous or densely pubemlent but esetose valves coUiculate over each seed, breaking up when ripe into free-falling indehiscent articles 3-4.5 mm long; seeds rhombic-lentiform ±2.6-3.3 mm in broad diam., the smooth testa either fuscous or yellowish-fawn.
In moist campo, from near sea-level to ± 300 m in Paraguay, locally plentiful in Argentina e. of rio Parana (Corrientes and Entre Rios) and n.-w. Umguay, extending weakly n. into s. Paraguay (near 26°S), and perhaps disjunctly e. to the Atlantic coastal plain in e. Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU.-H. X-IV. Mimosa flagellaris is distinctive among humifuse extratropical kindred because of ample veiny leaflets and spiculate leaf-stalks.
The latter are comeously thickened at base, immediately above the pulvinus, and in this feature recall the sympatric M. nuda, which has leaflets similar in size and venation, but reduced to one and a half pairs per pinna.
The pubescence of the stems and of the corolla lobes is variable, but no correlation with dispersal has been made out.
In the sample studied, the leaflets appear to be more numerous by one or two pairs in Atlantic Rio Grande do Sul, but the difference is not a decisive one.
A specimen from Paraguay (Villa Rica, Balansa 1469, G), egregious for large leaves, shows these dimensions in excess of the figures given in the foregoing description: leaf-stalks attaining 3 cm; pinna-rachises 4.5-8 cm; leaflets 9-11 pairs.
It remains to be shown whether this is a casual variant or is genetically determined.
The specimen was annotated, apparently by Chodat & Hassler, as a variety (unpublished) of M. procurrens (i.e., of M. caaguazuensis of this account), from which it differs, inter alia, in constantly conjugate pinnae and mdimentary calyx.
339.
Mimosa caingiiensis Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 159, fig. 25.
1948.-"Argentina.
Misiones: Dep.
Cainguas, Campo Viera, A. Pierotti 5512 y 5515 (typus), en fmct.
15-XII- 1946."
—Holotypus and paratypus, LIL 172182, 172185; phototypus, M. Lavin s.n.,
1986, NY (Pierotti 5515)\ Unarmed herb from deep-set, fusiform or carrot-like woody root, the pliantly humifuse stems 3-5 dm, sometimes radicant at lowest nodes, the whole plant finely pubemlent throughout and also, except for upper face of lfts, thinly hirsute with fine spreading stramineous setae to 2.5-5 (-5.5) mm, the relatively ample, dorsally reticulate-venulose lfts olivaceous concolorous, the globose capitula solitary in a few If-axils on subvertical peduncle as long as or longer than the subtending If.
Stipules ascending herbaceous, lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate 4.5-9 x 1-2 mm, finely 3-7-nerved and either simply pubemlent or both pubemlent and hispid extemally, glabrous within, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (7-) 12-32 (-40) X 0.6-0.8 mm, shaUowly 2-sulcate ventrally and tipped with a spicule less than 0.5 mm concealed by setae; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 3.5- 6.5 cm (of some subbasal lvs shorter, no further described), at base comeously thickened next to shrunken pulvinus, the interfoUolar segments 3.5- 6 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 9-15-jug., little graduated, the first (unequal) pair 1.5-3 mm distant from Unear-lanceolate green paraphyllidia ±1.5- 2 mm, the blades oblong from obtusangulate base, the larger ones (10-) 11-15.5 x 3.5-6 mm, obtuse apiculate, 2.5-3.3 times as long as wide, all 4-5- nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, near and beyond middle pinnately 3-6(-7)-branched on each side, the secondary nervules ascending at wide angles and V-furcate within the plane nerveless margin, the strong inner posterior nerve similarly branched and brochidodrome beyond mid-blade, the one anterior and outer posterior primary nerves shorter and simpler, the venation only faintly raised and not discolored above, beneath pallid and sharply prominulous.
Peduncles compressed, 9-13 cm; capitula without filaments, but including bracts and their ciUa, 7.5-10 mm diam., prior to anthesis hispid-conelike; bracts linearoblanceolate 2.5-3.8 mm, hispid dorsally and hispid-ciliate, persistent;yZow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, all (?) bisexual; calyx membranous campanulate 0.3-0.4 mm, the rim obscurely denticulate and randomly minutely ciliolate; corolla slenderly vase-shaped 3-3.6 mm, the membranous, delicately 4-ribbed tube glabrous, the scarcely firmer ovate lobes 0.75-0.9 x 0.5 mm, thinly ascending-pubemlent dorsally; filaments lilac-pink, united below the stipitate glabrous ovary into a very short stemonozone, exserted 5.5-6.5 mm; ovules 4.
Pods 10 or more per capitulum, subsessile, in profile narrowly oblong obtuse (6-)10-15 x 4.5-5 mm, (1-)2-4-seeded, the slender, nearly straight replum weakly but densely hispid with spreading setae less than 2.5 mm, the valves simply pubemlent, breaking up into free-falling articles ±3.5-4.5 mm long. In disturbed grassy places, sometimes along town streets, near 350 m, apparently very local, known only from depto. Cainguas, near 27°15'S in Misiones (Campo Grande; Campo Viera), Argentina.-H. IX-XII(-?).
The elegant M. caingiiensis has the habit and all floral and fmiting characters of M flagellaris, from which it differs essentially only in greater number of proportionately narrower leaflets (as given in key to subser. Pedunculosae).
The differences seem hardly to support independent specific rank.
I am indebted to Ing.
R. Vanni for making a special trip to Campo Grande to obtain fresh flowering material of M. caingiiensis to supplement the fmiting type.
340.
Mimosa filipetiola Burkart in Reitz, Fl. ilustr. catar.
LEGU/I: 197, est. 31.
1979.- "[BrazU.] Santa Catarina: Mafra: 10 km west of Tingui on the road to Mafra, campo, ca. 800 m .
.
.
L. B. Smith & R. M. Klein 10.618-A. (O2.02.1957)."-Holotypus, SI (not seen); isotypi, NY! US! Exiguously slender, diffuse or assurgent unarmed herbs, perennial but perhaps of short duration, the pUant few-branched bifacial stems 1.5- 5 dm, thinly strigulose with straight, retrorsely appressed, basaUy ecalcarate setae to ± 1.5-2 mm, neither pubemlent nor glandular, the filiform lfstks perfectly glabrous, the subconcolorous lfts thinly villosulous and finely ciliolate, the solitary axillary peduncles densely loosely retrostrigose, the globose capitula glabrous except for sometimes minutely ciliolate exserted bracts.
Stipules erect, lanceolate or ovate-acuminate from semicordate base, 4-8 x 1.5-3.2 mm, the herbaceous but soon papery brown, facially glabrous blades multistriate-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 13- 25 X 0.1-0.15 mm, both appendaged and spiculate at apex; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis in larger lvs ±15-30 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.7- 1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 20-30-jug. (in some small lower lvs 7-20-jug., no further described), decrescent proximally, the small first pair 0.4- 0.7 mm distant from lance-eUiptic herbaceous paraphyllidia 0.5-0.9 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from subrectangulate base, obscurely apiculate, those at mid-rachis 2.7-4.8 x 0.7-1.4 mm, all on upper face veinless and thinly villous on side posterior to midrib, on lower face 2-3- nerved from pulvinule and villosulous where exposed in sleep, the dorsally prominulous pallid midrib slightly displaced, 4-6-branched on posterior side, the inner (or only) posterior nerve simple short, sometimes obscure.
Peduncles 2-6 cm; capitula without filaments or emergent bracts 4.5-5.5 mm diam.; bracts ±2.5 mm, heteromorphic, the lowest 2-4 lance-attenuate, finely 3-5-nerved, the rest setiform 1-nerved, all persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, glabrous, some lower ones functionally staminate; calyx a shallowly lobed membranous saucer ±0.1 mm; corolla narrowly turbinate ±2-2.4 mm, strongly 4-ribbed, the ovate, scarcely thickened concave lobes ±0.8 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through not more than 0.3 mm and only below the ovary, exserted 4.5-5 mm.
Pods sessile or almost so, in profile narrowly oblong ±7-10 x 2.5 mm, (1-)2-4-seeded, the slender, shallowly undulate replum thinly strigulose with 1 row of forwardly appressed setulae, the valves smooth glabrous, probably breaking up into free-falling articles but not seen fully ripe.
In dry stony campo near 800 m, local on the upper forks of rio Negro, near 26°S on w. slope of Sa. do Mar, in mun. Lapa, Parana and mun. Mafra, Santa Catarina.-R. XI-XII(-?).
This elegantly frail mimosa was described as a member of ser. Obstrigosae Bentham, but its terete basifixed cauline setae exclude it from the more narrowly defined subser. Obstrigosae of this revision.
The setae are compatible with subser. Sparsae, but M. filipetiola would be anomalous in that company on account of its spiculate leafstalks, which have led me to include it, not without scruple, in subser. Pedunculosae.
In any context its extremely slender bifacial stems and finely striate-nerved, basally subcordate stipules would be a singular character-syndrome.
E(ii.7).
Series MIMOSA subseries LACTIFLUAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Lactifluae Bameby, subser. nov. Fmtices vel arbusculae, nunc juniores subherbaceae e caudice fruticoso, aculeis rectis vel leviter recurvis plerisque intemodialibus sparsis armatae vel inermes; stipulae saepe 4-6-, rarius 1-nerves vel dorso enerves; petioli espiculati; pinnae 1-, apud M. margaritae et interdum apud M. caeruleam dissite 2-jugae, foliolis 2-23-jugis aut parvis aut mediocribus aut amplissimis, nonnuUis apud M. goldmanii more subseriei Mimosae 1.5-jugis; calyx minusculus ore nudus vel leviter ciliolatus, epapposus; craspedium saepe sed haud semper latiusculum, glabrum, setosum, vel hispidissimum.
Plantae praecipue austro-Mexicanae, una Americam Centralem attingens et una in Pemviae Andibus sejuncta.—Sp. typica: M. lactiflua Delile ex Bentham.
M. VIII. Psilocarpae, IX. Michelianae, X. Xantiae'Qritton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 145, in clave.
1928.
Shrubs and treelets 1-6 m, or (M. caerulea) functionally herbaceous from woody base, either unarmed or armed at or below nodes with straight or declined aculei, the inflorescence either terminally pseudoracemose, or the globose to plumply ovoid capitula lateral to primary axis on shortly extended branchlets or condensed brachyblasts; stipules 1-6-nerved, or extemally nerveless; lf-stks 0.3-11 cm, espiculate; pinnae conjugate or exceptionally (M. margaritae, some M. caerulea) 2-jug.; lfts 2-23-jug., the inner posterior 1ft sometimes suppressed, the lfts then only 3-5 per pinna (as in subser. Mimosa); calyx mostly small campanulate and less than 0.7 mm, the rim glabrous or minutely fimbriolate, or (M. deamii) incipiently pappiform; filaments free or almost so; pods either sessile or stipitate, (1-)2-4- seeded, densely hispid overall to glabrous facially and hispid marginally, or glabrous overall.
Spp. 10, of desert, chaparral, deciduous tropical brush-woodland, and pine-oak forest in s. Mexico, from Baja Califomia Sur to Veracmz and Chiapas, most numerous and diverse in Oaxaca, one extending s. to Costa Rica; one isolated in Andes of n. Pem.
The subseries Lactifluae takes form around a group of woody, non-sarmentose mimosas of southem Mexico that are commonly but not invariably armed with straight intemodal aculei and bear capitula in efoliate or only basally efoliate pseudoracemes terminal to branches of the current season: M. lactiflua, M. psilocarpa, M. deamii.
Each of these species shows a marked drift toward few and large leaflets, a trend that reaches a culmination in M. goldmanii, where the leaflets of each pinna are reduced to two or three pairs, as in subser. Mimosa.
The last mentioned is further peculiar for a modified inflorescence of capitula crowded onto lateral brachyblasts.
Attached by threads of affinity (or similarity) to this nucleus are species with smaller, often more numerous leaflets, such as M. caerulea, which resembles M. lactiflua but is less woody, and sometimes bears leaves composed of two pairs of pinnae; M. margaritae, likewise with four pinnae per leaf; densely hispidulouspiloseM. tricephala; andM sicyocarpa, of which the more recurved aculei, bome on stems and on some leaf-stalks, suggest a nexus with subser. Castae.
The theme of lateral brachyblasts just noted for macrophyllidious M. goldmanii reappears in a microphyllidious mode in the polymorphic complex here treated provisionally as M. xanti sensu lato.
To these I have added M. incarum, a newly described Pemvian species which bears an extraordinary superficial likeness to M. tricephala, although it may have arisen from a source close to subser. Bolivianae or Polycarpae, where it would fit well if it had interpinan autonomous group, and M. micheliana to a nal spicules. monotypic one.
Bentham was acquainted with only three speThe whole subseries Lactifluae has been studcies of subser. Lactifluae, then represented by ied in the field by R. Grether in connection with three individual collections, the cultivated type the Leguminosae of Oaxaca project, and the taxof M. lactiflua, of uncertain provenance, that of onomically abstmse knot of small taxa equivaM. tricephala from Veracmz, and that ofM. xanlent to M. xanti sensu lato is currently under ti from Baja Califomia Sur.
He referred the first biosystematic analysis at Ixtapalapa.
For this two to his ser. Castae and the third to his ser. reason I provide here only a key to the species Pectinatae, the best disposition that could be and, except for the one South American member made at that time.
The subseries is approxiof the group, very brief descriptions, commenmately equivalent to Britton & Rose's informally tary, and summary of known dispersal, all of named Xantiae, with these differences: M. goldwhich will be amplified in Grether's forthcoming manii misplaced in Sensitivae (=subser. Mimonograph. mosa), M. psilocarpa and M. deamii relegated to Conspectus of ser. Lactifluae Mimosa 341. psilocarpa B. L. Robinson 342. lactiflua Delile 343. caerulea Rose 344. margaritae Rose 345. sicyocarpa B. L. Robinson 346. deamii B. L. Robinson 347. goldmanii B. L. Robinson 348. tricephala Chamisso & Schlechtendal 349. xanti A. Gray 350. incarum Bameby Key to species of ser. Lactifluae 1.
Pinnae of all lvs exactly 1-jug. 2.
Peduncles either axillary to coevally expanding lvs along new branches or forming a terminal pseudoraceme exserted from foliage.
3.
Lfts 2-4 pairs, the distal pair 30-80 x 15-35 mm; s.-e. Oaxaca and w. Chiapas 341.
M. psilocarpa (p. 573).
3.
Lfts 3-20 pairs, smaller, the distal pair of largest pinnae 11-36 x 3-18 mm; both sympatric and more widespread, where sympatric the lfts decidedly smaller.
4.
Lf-stks relatively short, mostly less than 15 mm (in M. deamii attaining 27 mm), like the stems densely strigose or hispid; pods always densely appressedor hispid-setose.
5.
Lfts of longer pinnae 6-16-jug., and the larger distal ones 2-15 x 2-6 mm.
6.
Plants of upper Maranon valley in Peru; peduncles 4-15 mm; cauline aculei recurved.
350.
M. incarum (p. 567).
6.
Plants of s. Mexico (Veracruz, Morelos); peduncles 15-25 mm; cauline aculei straight or nearly so 348.
M. tricephala (p. 575).
5.
Lfts of longer pinnae 3-6-jug., and the larger distal ones 12-36 x 6-18 mm; local in s.-e. Oaxaca (isthmus of Tehuantepec) 346.
M. deamii (p. 574).
4.
Lf-stks relatively long, 15-55 mm, often smooth, but if hispid then remotely aculeate; s. Mexico.
7.
Lfts of longer pinnae 4-20-jug. 8.
Pod hispid on both valves and replum; lfts of longer pinnae typically 9-20-jug., occasionaUy only 6-8-jug. but then ample and to 6-11 mm wide; Jalisco and Colima.
.
345.
M. sicyocarpa (p. 574).
8.
Pod smooth or remotely setulose; lfts of longer pinnae 4-11-jug. and less than 5 mm wide; s.-e. Jalisco and Guerrero e.-ward 343.
M. caerulea (p. 573).
7.
Lfts of longer pinnae 3-4-jug.; Oaxaca 342.
M. lactiflua (p. 573).
2.
Peduncles on shortly extended lateral branchlets or fasciculate on brachyblasts lateral to primary homotinous branches.
9.
Lfts ofeach pinna 6 or more, i.e., regularly 3-23-jug.; pod 4-7 mm wide, hispid overall; widespread from Baja Califomia Sur to Costa Rica 349.
M. xanti (p. 575).
9.
Lfts of each pinna either 3 or 5, the anterior 1ft of proximal pair wanting; pod (so far as known) 8-9 mm, glabrous; local in Puebla, e. Guerrero, and Oaxaca, Mexico.
.
347.
M. goldmanii (p. 574).
Pinnae of some lvs 2-jug. 10.
Plants of continental s. Mexico; bijugate form of: 343.
M. caerulea (p. 573).
10.
Plants of Sta. Margarita I., Baja Califomia Sur 344.
M. margaritae (p. 574).
341.
Mimosa psilocarpa B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 35: 325.
1900.—"Mountain woods between 'S. Carl and S. Bartolo Yuahntepec [Yuautepec],' Oaxaca, collected by C. & E. Seler, 6 January, 1896, no. 1727."-Holotypus, GH!; clastotypus + photo, NY! Notable in the series for few (2-4) pairs of ample, continuously comeous-marginate leaflets, those at tip of each pinna 3-8 cm long, for relatively large capitula, without filaments 6-8 mm diam., and for glabrous stipitate craspedia; in most other respects resembling and seemingly closely related to M. lactiflua.
Openings in woodland 450-1350 m, local in s.-e. Oaxaca (mun. Yuautepec and Tehuantepec) and interior w. Chiapas (mun. Tuxtla Gutierrez), Mexico.
The type has obtuse leaffets, but several collections made by T. MacDougall in the municipio of Yuautepec have acuminate ones.
342.
Mimosa lactiflua DelUe ex Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 393.
1875 & /« Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 311.
1876. "
.
.
. in America meridionali (an Brasilia?), ex specimine olim in Horto Monspeliensi culto, in Herb. DC. asservato."
—Holotypus, numbered 307b and dated 1836, G! = NY Neg. 11833.
M. vasquezii Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 153.
1928.—"Cerro de la Carbonera, Matatlan, Oaxaca, June, 1906, C. Conzatti 1482."-Holotypus, US!; clastotypus + photo, NY!—Equated with M. lactiflua by Grether, 1987: 314.
Notable for stiff"woody branches, straight (not omnipresent) aculei, lf-formula of i/3-4, lfts firm lustrous obovate not over twice as long as wide, short terminal pseudoracemes of glabrous flowers, and at least shortly stipitate craspedia with glabrous valves.
Bmshy hillsides ±1500-1700 m, centr. Oaxaca, Mexico (Ocotlan, Matatlan).
No record survives of the origin of the plant grown at Montpelier by Delile.
Bentham guessed it might be Brazilian, but nothing like it has been seen since in South America.
The species was collected as early as 1791 by Th.
Haenke, very likely on the road between Acapulco and Cuernavaca ("in Mexico occidentali," Haenke s.n.
PRC! sub nomine ined.
M. nitidula K. Presl).
343.
Mimosa caerulea Rose, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 5: 141.
1897.-"Collectedby Mr. C. G. Pringle on the foot hills above Cuemavaca, Morelos [Mexico], alt. 1,968 meters, November 18, 1895 (No. 6200), and 1896 (No. 6385)."-Syntypi, US!; isosyntypi, F (6385)\ = F Neg. 54785, GH! NY! (?) M. micheliana B. L. Robinson, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist. 31: 259.
1904.-"Mexico: La Correa [=Agua de Correa], Guerrero, alt. 250 m, September, 1898, E. Langlasse, no. 386."-Holotypus, GH! = NY Neg. 7 7985. —M. schrankioides sensu M. Micheli, 1903: 279; non Bentham.
M. mixtecana T. Brandegee, Univ. Calif Publ. Bot. 3: 379.
1909.—".. . common throughout the San Luis [Tultitlanapa] region [in s. Puebla] and adjoining Oaxaca. [C. A. Purpus] Nos.
2673, 2674."—Isosyntypi (2673), F! = F Neg. 5^777, NY!-Equated by Grether, 1987: 314 with M. lactiflua.
Closely related to M. lactiflua, but less woody, the homotinous stems slender and pliant, and the lfts of longer pinnae (4-)5-10-jug., of narrower outline, 2-5 times as long as wide.
Pinnae sometimes erratically 2-jug.; aculei straight or (M. micheliana, perhaps a distinct form passing into M. sicyocarpa) recurved.
Locally abundant on brushy hillsides at ±1600-1950 m, s.-w. Mexico (Morelos, Puebla, and immediately adj. Veracruz and Oaxaca); disjunct in pine forest at ±2150 m on Sa. del Tigre in s.-e. Jalisco and in tropical deciduous woodland of the Pacific foothiUs near 250 m in s.-w. Guerrero (M. micheliana).
344.
Mimosa margaritae Rose ex Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 171.
1928.-"Santa Margarita Island [off the Pacific coast of] Baja Califomia [Sur, near 25°30'N].
Type collected Febmary 28, 1889, by T. S. Brandegee.''- Clastotypus + photo, NY! An obscure mimosa, resembling in foliage the 2-jugate state of M. caerulea, but remotely allopatric and the flower and pod as yet unknown.
Known only from the type-coUection.
The plant described from the Cape region by Wiggins in Shreve and Wiggins, 1964: 607 appears to be, at least in part, a form of unijugate M. xanti. close affinity Ues with M. caerulea.
This differs in less numerous leaflets and essentially smooth, not densely hispid craspedia, and is of vicariant dispersal eastward from Sa. del Tigre in southem Jalisco and southem Guerrero.
This ideal separation is complicated by the existence in Colima and on the coast of southem Jalisco near Chamela of plants bearing the hispid craspedia of M sicyocarpa but leaves with only 6-8 pairs of leaflets per pinna, the largest attaining 6-11 mm in width.
Pending critical study of their status, the characters have been omittted from the foregoing description, but are allowed for in the key to Lactifluae.
345.
Mimosa sicyocarpa B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 313.
1898.-"Collected by E. W. Nelson on roadside between San Sebastiana [sic] and the summit of the mountain known as the Bufo [sic] de Mascota, Jalisco, alt. 1550 m, 20 March, 1897, no. 4101."
- Holotypus, GH! = NY Neg. 11989.
M. sicyocarpa sensu Standley, 1922: 361; Britton & Rose, 1928: 154; McVaugh, 1987: 219,fig.29.
Scrambling or at length arborescent shrubs attaining 6 m, some branches unarmed but others armed on intemodes and some lf-stks with few straight or recurved prickles, variably pilosulous or yellowish-hispid or both, sometimes glabrate throughout, the capitula often pseudoracemose in early anthesis becoming axillary; leaf-formula i/9-19(-20), the petiole 2-5.5 cm, the longer lfts 9-25 X 3-7 mm, ±3-4 times as long as wide; calyx campanulate ±0.5 mm, the orifice glabrous or minutely fimbriolate; pods sessile, when wellfertilized ±11-27 X 5.5-6.5 mm, (1-)2-3-seeded, the replum hispid with stiff stramineous setae 1.5-6 mm, the valves similarly hispid and otherwise glabrous.
In bmshy places in the pine-oak belt at 1500- 2400 m, and descending (McVaugh, 1987) to deciduous tropical forest along the coast as low as 100 m, known only from the states of Jalisco and CoUma, Mexico (within 19°-2rN, 103°- 105°W).
Typical M. sicyocarpa is suggestively similar in most respects to M. (subser. Castae) schrankioides, but lacks the close files of petiolar aculei characteristic of that species, and I suppose its 346.
Mimosa deamii B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 35: 324.
1900.-"Collected at Salina Cmz, State of Oaxaca, Mexico, by Charles C. Deam, 21 December, 1898, no. 113."
- Holotypus, GH!; clastotypus + photo, NY! M. deamii sensu Britton & Rose, 1928: 152.
Notable among the macrophyllidious suffruticose and arborescent mimosae of the Isthmus region for lack of aculei, harsh strigose indumentum of branches and hypophyllum of the (3-)4-6 pairs of obovate-elliptic lfts, and for densely antrorsely strigose craspedia; larger leaflets obovate-elliptic, obtuse or abmptly acuminulate, 12-36 X 6-18 mm; inflorescence of M. lactiflua, pseudoracemose and shortly exserted from foliage.
A treelet to 3 m, sometimes ffowering when only 3 dm tall.
Deciduous bmsh-woodland, near sea-level and to 900 m in the foothills, localized about the s. end of Istmo de Tehuantepec in s.-e. Oaxaca (Salina Cmz; Tehuantepec; Ixtepec).
347.
Mimosa goldmanii B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 308.
1898.-"Collected by Nelson & Goldman between Juchitan and Chivela, Oaxaca, at 50 to 275 m. altitude, 1895, n.2628 "-Holotypus, GH!; isotypus, US!; clastotypus + photo, NY! Either armed or not, notable in the series for reduction of leaf-formula to i/1.5-2.5, the anterior 1ft of proximal pair suppressed, and for peduncles all (or almost all) arising from scaly brachyblasts, and not in terminal pseudoraceme; larger (distal) leaflets of typical Oaxacan var. to ± 14-28 X 5-14 mm, of an undescribed Pueblan var. much smaller, to 7-10.5 x 3-4 mm.
In thorn forest, the typical form very local on the Pacific slope of Istmo de Tehuantepec in s.- e. Oaxaca, Mexico, a microphyllous var. at 1120 m in s. Puebla (Puerto del Gato, 20 mi s. of Izucar de Matamoros, Luckow 3262, NY, TEX).
When reduced to exactly six leaffets, as often in the typical plant of the Isthmus and always (so far as known) in the microphyllidious Pueblan variety, the leaves of M. goldmanii are technically identical to those of subser. Mimosa.
The close affinity of the species is, however, certainly to M. lactiflua and immediate kindred in southem Mexico, from which it differs principally in xerophytic modification of the infforescence.
In organization of the infforescence M. goldmanii connects the core of subser. Lactifluae with the otherwise somewhat isolated M. xanti.
348.
Mimosa tricephala Chamisso & Schlechtendal, Linnaea 5: 591.
1830.—"inter Laguna Verde et Actopan [Veracmz, Mexico]."—Holotypus, collected by Schiede & Deppe, not seen, to be sought at HAL; no isotypus found.
M. chaetocarpa T. S. Brandegee, Univ. Calif Publ. Bot. 10: 182.
1922.—".. . only fruiting specimens [in reality galled] with remnants of old dried flowers . .. at Cameron [Camar6n], Vera Cruz. [C. A. Purpus] No. 8600."-Holotypus, UC 206733\; isotypus, NY! M. tricephala sensu Bentham, 1875: 394; B. L. Robinson, 1898: 312; Britton & Rose, 1928: 154.
Closely resembling M. xanti in setose and pilose stems and lf-axes, but with the exserted terminal pseudoraceme of M. caerulea, the craspedia also densely setose overall.
Lfts of longer pinnae 7-14-jug., the longest 7-14 x (2-)3-6 mm.
In pristine or disturbed deciduous woodland or in savanna at ±50-500 m on the e. foothills of Sa.
Madre Oriental and adj. coastal plain in centr. Veracruz, and recorded once on the plateau, near or above 2000 m, close to the Veracmz boundary in Puebla.
My concept of M. tricephala is based on five collections from lowland Veracmz that agree closely with the protologue: /.
A. Purpus s.n. (NY, US); Calzada 2054 (NY) and Villanueva G. 247 (NY), both from mun. Emiliano Zapata, in the region of the type-locality; litis & Lasseigne 848 (NY) from rio Antigua north-west of Veracruz; and from the over-mature type-collection of M. chaetocarpa, which bears atypical galled fmits.
349.
Mimosa xanti A. Gray, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 5: 157.
1862.-"At Cape San Lucas, &c. in Lower Califomia, between August, 1859, and Febmary, I860."—Isotypus, Xantus 29, NY! Stiffly branched shrubs and treelets, randomly armed at or below nodes with 1-3 straight, broadbased aculei 3-9 mm, the young stems and foliage subglabrous to densely puberulent and setose-hispidulous, the lfts always discontinuously appressed-setose-ciliate, the globose capitula on a succession of scaly brachyblasts or on shortshoots below the primary branch-apex.
Stipules narrowly triangular to subulate-setiform, indistinctly 1-nerved.
Leaf-formula i/3-23, the petiole 3-32 mm, espiculate; rachis of longer pinnae l-9(-10) cm; lfts obliquely ovate to oblong-elUptic or Unear-oblong, either obtuse-mucronulate or acute, the longest 5-21 X (1.5-)2-6(-8.5) mm, the blades 2-4(-5)-nerved from pulvinule.
Peduncles either solitary or to 3-4 per node; capitula without filaments 5-7 mm diam.; flowers with calyx-tubes of 0.15-0.3(-0.4) mm, not or obscurely denticulate, the rim with weak cilia 0.1-0.4 mm; corolla 1.8-2.9 mm, the lobes 1-nerved; filaments pink, exserted ±4.5-7 mm.
Pods commonly 2-several per capitulum, sessile or almost so, in profile narrowly oblong 14-25 X 4-7 mm, 2-4-seeded, usually at once densely pubemlent and hispidulous overall with mixed fine hairs and erect-incurved setae 0.5-2(-2.5) mm, less often simply hispid with erect setae 2- 5 mm, these sometimes confined to replum, or the whole pod exceptionally smooth glabrous, the dehiscence craspedial.
The foregoing description covers in broad, uncritical terms the parameters of variation encountered in a taxonomically difficult group of one or perhaps two species currently under biosystematic study by Grether and Chehaibar at UAMIZ.
In anticipation of their monographic account I attempt here no more than to account for the prolix synonymy involved in the group and to indicate in key form one possible sorting of these, and forebear from expressing definite views on the taxonomic status of any component.
From superficial study of the herbarium record four groups of forms emerge, sortable as follows: Key to members of the M. xanti complex Pods overall densely puberulent and setose or setulose, the setae 0.5-2(-2.5) mm; most lateral branchlets condensed into scaly brachyblasts; s. Mexico to Costa Rica, w. to s. Baja Califomia.
2.
Lfts of longer pinnae 6-14-jug.; widespread in the rangejust indicated.
Includes in addition to typical M. xanti these segregates: Mm. conzattii, guanacastensis, lagunensis, langlasssei, nelsonii. .. Taxon A. 2.
Lfts of longer pinnae 3-6-jug.; local in Balsas Basin and thence e. to s. Oaxaca.
Includes M. lignosa.
Taxon B. Pods overall or only on replum hispid with erect setae 2-5 mm or quite glabrous, puberulence of short hairs 0; lateral floral branchlets often but not always shortly extended; local in Oaxaca and Chiapas, Mexico.
3.
Lfts 8-13-jug., essentially as in Taxon A, the larger ones 2.4-3 times as long as wide; longer setae of pod 4-5 mm; local at 1300-1400 m in mun. Trinitaria, Chiapas (Breedlove 27661, 46067, 46966, aU CAS, NY!) Taxon C. 3.
Lfts 13-23-jug., the larger ones 3.5-7 times as long as wide; at ±300-900 m in s.-e. Oaxaca and adj. Chiapas (mun. Arriaga and Cintalapa).
Includes Mm. chiapensis, doylei, mellii, oaxacana. ... Taxon D. Synonymy of M. xanti sensu lato M. nelsonii B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 314.
1898.—"Between San Geronimo and La Venta, Oaxaca, at 665 m altitude, 13 July, 1895 "-Holotypus, E. W. Nelson 2775, US!; paratypi, E. Palmer 88, F! = F Neg. 59882, NY! US! [Taxon A] M. langlasseiM.
Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve34: 277, pi. 22.
1903.-"Pied de Jorullo, 900 m, avril 1898."-Holotypus, Langlasse 99, G! [Taxon A] M. lignosa M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 34: 278, pi. 23.
1903.-"Environs de Las Higueritas [Michoacan], terres chaudes, 400 m, juillet 1898."
— Holotypus, Langlasse 232, G! [Taxon B] M. conzattii Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 153.
1928.—"Cerro San Antonio, Oaxaca, September, 1908."—Lectotypus, designated by Grether, 1987: 315, GH; isotypi (fragm.), F! NY (+ photo)! -Equated by Grether, I.e., with M. langlassei. [Taxon A] M. chiapensis Britton in Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 154.
1928.-"Monserrate, Chiapas, May, 1925."-Holotypus, C. A. Purpus 10313, NY!- Equated by Grether, 1987:316, wUh M. mellii. [Taxon D] M. doylei Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 155.
1928.-"Chiapas.
Los Pinos, December 12, 1906."
- Holotypus, C. B. Doyle 56, US!; isotypus, NY!- Equated by Grether, 1987: 316, with M mellii. [Taxon D] M. mellii Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 155.
1928.—"Near Chivela, Oaxaca, January, 1928, C. D. Mell 2."—Holotypus, US!; isotypi (2 sheets, one = NY Neg. 9342), NY!—Recognized as a distinct sp. by Grether, 1987, I.e. [Taxon D] M. oaxacana Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 155.
1928.—"Between Guichocovi and Lagunas, Oaxaca June 27, 1895, Nelson 27^6."-Holotypus, US! clastotypus (fragm), NY!—Equated by Grether, 1987 316, with M. mellii. [Taxon D] (?)M lagunensis M. E. Jones, Contr. W. Bot. 18: 39 1933. —"On the laguna, Laguna mts.
L[ower] California].
Sept. 22, 1930."—Holotypus, designated by Morton, Contr. U.S. NaU.
Herb. 29(2): 98.
1945: Jones 27070 (not 27290 as pubUshed) = POM 191881, not seen. [Taxon A, ex char.] M. guanacastensis Standley, Fl.
Costa Rica 2: 502.
1937. —"Entre Guachipelin y Liberia, Guanacaste."
—Holotypus, Brenes 15583, F!; isotypus, NY!; paratypus, Brenes 15496, NY! [Taxon A] M. zacapana Standley & Steyermark, Publ. Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 23: 57.
1944.-"Guatemala: Dept.
Zacapa: Rocky slopes near Santa Rosalia, alt. 250-300 meters, October, 1939."-Holotypus, Steyermark 29018, F!; paraptypi, Steyermark 29377, Standley 73901, F! [Taxon A] 350.
Mimosa incarum Bameby, sp. nov., habitu aliisque notulis M. bolivianam revocans, ab ea setis caulinis laevibus vel minutissime scaberulis (nec plumosis), pinnis ±2-5 (nec 5-11.5) cm usque longis, foliolis 8-15 (nec 20-30)-jugis usque, capituUs minoribus 4-5 (nec 6-8) mm diametientibus, necnon calyce minuto glabro vel minutissime ciliolato (nec paleaceopappiformi) diversa; a M. polycarpa var. redundanti, sympatrica et signis multis congrua, spicula interpinnali nulla, foliolis utrinque puberuUs, flosculorum lobulis praeter carinam glabram puberuUs distans.—Peru.
Cajamarca: Conga de Urquia (Sucre-Oxamarca), Prov. Celendm, 19.
V.1976 (fi),^.
Sagastegui A. (with /.
Cabanillas S. & O. Dios C) 8447.-Yiolotypus, NY.
M. boliviana sensu Macbride, 1943: 87, ex parte (Weberbauer 4275 = F Neg. 32034); non Bentham.
Stiffly branched shrubs attaining 2-3 m, armed at or immediately below nodes and randomly on low ribs of intemodes with recurved stramineous or fuscous aculei l-4.5(-5) mm, the stems, Ifand inflorescence-axes at once densely gray-puberulent and hispid with spreading lutescent, smooth or microscopically papillate-scaberulous setae to 0.6-1.5 mm, the foliage bicolored, the lfts dark brown-olivaceous above, paler beneath, both puberulent and subappressed-strigose-setose on both faces or simply puberulent above, coarsely but not quite continuously setose-ciliate, the small, globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary and geminate in the axil of hysteranthously expanding lvs, the young inflorescence pseudoracemose.
Stipules firm, erect incurved, narrowly lanceolate 2-4 x 0.35-0.6 mm, 1 -nerved, pubescent dorsally like stem, becoming dry and brittle.
Leaf-stalks including pulvinus 4-10(-12) mm, at middle 0.4-0.7 mm diam., the dorsal rim sometimes erratically aculeate; spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 2-4.7 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1.2-4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (7-)8-l 6-jug., decrescent upor downward from below mid-rachis, the first pair 0.6-2 mm distant from lance-subulate paraphyllidia 0.5-1.5 mm, the blades oblong or ovate-oblong from broadly obtusangulate base, abruptly acuminulate-mucronate, the larger ones 6-12 x 2.1-4.2 mm, 2.2-3.8 times as long as wide, aU veinless above, beneath 3-nerved from pulvinule, the slender prominulous midrib dividing blade ±1:1.5-2, the weak inner posterior nerve expiring near mid-blade, the outer one very short or obscure, the marginal setae narrowly ascending, 0.05-0.15 mm diam., free for 0.3-1 mm.
Peduncles 4-15 mm; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; receptacle setose; bracts linear-elliptic or -oblanceolate 0.9-1.7 x 0.3-0.4 mm, weakly setose-ciliolate near apex; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx 0.25-0.4 mm, minutely denticulate, the rim glabrous or microscopically puberulent; corolla narrowly turbinate or narrowly funnelform 4-angulate 2-2.4 mm, the ovate lobes 0.4-0.7 x 0.4-0.5 mm, a little thickened and hooded at very apex, extemally minutely spreadingor retro-puberulent on either side of glabrous keel; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 4-5 mm.
Pods (few seen) sessile, narrowly oblong in profile, ±8-24 x 5-6.5 mm, (l_)2-4-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, the replum and valves alike densely puberulent and yeUow-setulose overall, the setae of replum 0.5-2 mm, of valves shorter, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling articles ± 5-6 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
On brushy hillsides and along roadsides, 2100- 2600 m, apparently not rare in the upper Maraiion valley between 6° and 8°S in e. Cajamarca and e. La Libertad, Pem.-Fl.
V-IX(-?).
I refer M. incarum to subser. Lactifluae with reluctance, its distance from the Mexican center of the subseries being at first thought implausible.
If its leaf-stalks were spiculate it would fit neatly into subser. Polycarpae, but they are not.
Its technical and overall resemblance to M. xanti is so close that the pair cannot be sundered.
Moreover the dry inter-Andean valleys of Peru are known to harbor surprising disjunct races of distantly allopatric xeromorphic and savannicolous species: e.g., in Caesalpiniaceae Senna macranthera var. andina and S. pallida var. nemorosa (H.B.K.) Irwin & Bameby (1982: 188, 544, respectively).
E(ii.8).
Series MIMOSA subseries BOLIVIANAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Bolivianae Bameby, subser. nov., ab affinibus Lactifluis caulium petiolomm et pedunculorum setis plumosis, necnon calyce paleaceopappiformi diversae.—Sp. unica: M. boliviana Bentham.
Mimosa sect. Eumimosa ser. Pectinatae sensu Bentham, 1875: 396, minima ex parte, quoad M. bolivianam solam.
Like subser. Lactifluae, and especially resembling M. xanti and M. incarum, but setae of stems, lf-stks and peduncles plumose, rachis of many pinnae dorsally armed with recurved aculei, and calyx paleaceous-pappiform.
Sp.
1, of middle elevations on the e. slope of the Andes of s. Peru and Bolivia.
Mimosa boliviana, distinguished in ser. Mimosa by plumose indumentum and pappiform calyx, has no obvious immediate relative.
It was associated by Bentham with M. polycarpa and M. xanti in a heterogeneous ser. Pectinatae, in which the indumentum was unique.
Plumose setae have developed independently elsewhere in ser. Mimosa, notably in subser. Polycephalae, but these species, native to the Brazilian Planalto, are unarmed, virgate subshmbs and have Strongly connate filaments associated with a paleaceous calyx.
351.
Mimosa boliviana Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 396.
1875.-"Bolivia, Kelly, Mandon, n. 756."—Lectotypus, Mandon 756, collected near Ananea in depto. La Paz at 2500 m, V-VI. 1860, K!; isotypi, NY (3 sheets)! P! S! W!; syntypus, Kelly s.n.,
K (ex hb. Lambert.)! = NY Neg. 7926.
M. kuntzei Harms in O. Kuntze, Revis. gen. pi. 3(2): 67.
1898.-"Bolivia: Rio Juntas 1600 m."-Holotypus, Kuntze s.n.,
18.
IV. 1892 (fl, fr), +B; isotypus, NY (hb. Kimtze.)!—Equated with M. boliviana by Harms, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 18: 233.
1922.
Shrubs of bushy outline attaining 2-2.5 m, the stiff stems armed at the nodes, or randomly on ribs descending from stipules and petiole, and also along dorsal rib of some pinna-rachises, with recurved, stramineous or brown, often proximally puberulent aculei 1-6.5 mm, the stems, lfaxes and peduncles densely (rarely thinly) pilosetomentulose with sordid or rusty plumose setae ±0.5-1 mm, the developing foliage yellow-silky, becoming strongly bicolored, the mature lfts on upper face dark brown or brown-olivaceous, sublustrous and finely minutely villosulous, on lower face paler green or rufous, densely strigose with plain forwardly appressed or subappressed hairs, the revolute margin coarsely discontinuously ciliate with forwardly appressed setae free for 0.6- 1.4 mm, the globose capitula solitary and fasciculate by 2-4 in the axil of fully developed or coevally expanding lvs, soon axillary and lateral.
Stipules erect, Unear-lanceolate or setiform (2-) 3-6 X 0.3-0.6 mm, dorsally strigose with plain setae, glabrous within, tardily deciduous.
Leafstalks 2-l2(-l6) X 0.6-1 mm; spicules 0; p//2«^^ I-jug., the rachis of longer ones (4.5-)5.5-9.5 (-11.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (19-)23-30-jug., abruptly decrescent proximally and gradually so distally, the unequal first pair 0.5-2 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.6-0.7 mm, the blades oblong or narrowly lance-oblong from deeply obtusangulate or obliquely truncate base, at apex acuminulate and mucronate, the larger ones (6.5-)7-12(-14) x 2-3.6(-3.8) mm, 3^.5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the slenderly prominulous midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the l(-2) posterior nerves very short.
Peduncles stout (1.7)-2.5-5.5 cm; capitula without filaments 6-7.5(-8) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but often hispidulous with shortly emergent bracteal setae; bracts narrowly oblanceolate 1.2-2 X 0.2-0.5 mm, keeled and glabrous dorsally, the distal margins ciliate with few ascending setae to 0.4-1 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some small lower ones staminate; calyx paleaceous-pappiform (1.5-) 1.7-2.3 mm, each lobe decompound almost to base into stramineous setae; corollas subcylindric (2.4-)2.7- 3.3 mm, the membranous tube glabrous, the cymbiform lobes 0.9-1.3 x 0.5 mm, a little thickened at hooded apex, carinate dorsally, minutely densely puberulent on either side of glabrous keel; filaments pink (drying brown), free to base, exserted 4.5-6.5 mm.
Pods ±2-12 per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong 17- 26 X 5.5-6.5 mm, (2-)3^-seeded, the shallowly or scarcely constricted replum 0.5-0.7 mm diam., either simply hispidulous or randomly armed along dorsal or both dorsal and lateral ribs with divaricate, glabrous or puberulent, tapering stramineous setae to 2—4.5 mm, the firmly papery brown valves low-colliculate over each seed and either there only or overall densely pilosulous with fine erect plumulose setae, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 5-8 mm long; seeds in broad profile ±4 X 3.5 mm, the smooth testa fuscous-olivaceous dull.
In thickets, on stream banks and in disturbed, dry or moderately moist brush-woodland, 1050- 2500 m, scattered along the foothills and interior valleys of the Andes in the Bolivian departamentos of La Paz and Cochabamba and in adj. Puno (prov. Sandia), Pem, in lat. 14°-17°S, long. 65°30-69°30'W; and apparently disjunct in the upper Urubamba valley near 12°30'S in depto. Cuzco, prov. La Convenci6n, Pem.—Fl.
V-XII, perhaps sporadically through the year.
E(ii.9).
Series MIMOSA subseries DOLENTES Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Dolentes Bameby, subser. nov., inter Mimosas seriei Mimosae inflorescentia pseudoracemosa determinata, capitulo summo prius quam antecedentibus maturescenti, necnon capitulomm fertilium leguminibus valvatim deorsum ab apice dehiscentibus, hiantibus, diu persistentibus, sphaeram densissimam vix compressibilem efformantibus praestantes.—Sp. typica: M. dolens Vellozo.
M. ser. Meticulosae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 374- 384.
1841, magna ex parte, quoad *Glaucas spp. 60, 61, 63-64, **Rudes spp. 65, 66, 70, *****Eriocaules sp. 86, caeteris exclusis.
Nomen seriale Meticulosae praetermittere licet quia species eponyma, M. meticulosa Martius, typo deficienti ac descriptione manca, perdubia manet.
M. ser. Meticulosae sensu Bentham, 1875: 401-406, ex parte, quoad A***Rigidas spp. 71-77, 79, B*Rudes spp. 81, 82, caeteris exclusis.
M. ser. Cfl5?fl^ sensu Bentham, 1841: 364; 1875: 395, minima ex parte (M. dolens sola), caeteris exclusis.
Functionally herbaceous, either virgately erect or diffuse, from woody roots, 2-20(-25) dm, either unarmed or less often armed at or below nodes with subhorizontal aculei, glabrous to densely setose-hispid or silky-lanate, rarely also glandular-setulose or resinous; stipules 1-7- nerved; petioles (3-)5-55 mm, espiculate;/>z«/2<2^ conjugate, the lfts (5-)7-64-jug., the largest 4.5- 80 mm, all continuously, either slenderly or coarsely marginate; inflorescence an efoliate, determinate pseudoraceme of either solitary or geminate, globose, densely many-fld capitula, the terminal capitulum maturing before (and often larger than) those immediately below it; calyx pappiform to obsolete; pods numerous, crowded into a hard sphere, small, (1-)2-4-seeded, valvately dehiscent from apex downward, the entire valves gaping to release the seeds, long persistent.
Spp. 1, of e. Brazil s.-ward from centr. Minas Gerais to n. Umguay w. through s. Goias and Mato Grosso to Paraguay and e. Bolivia, thence s. to n.-e. Argentina, most abundant and bewilderingly diverse s. of the Tropic of Capricorn.
The subseries Dolentes consists of a single aggregate species that absorbs in addition to the nomenclatural type, M. dolens, transferred from ser. Castae Bentham, elements of several subgroups of ser. Meticulosae Bentham.
It is defined by correlated characters of inflorescence and fiiut.
Its determinate pseudoraceme, of which the furthest capitulum, often a little larger than the rest, comes into flower before those immediately below it, is found nowhere else in Mimosa.
When complete it is unmistakable, but it is not easy to recognize in immature, damaged or decapitated specimens.
The dense spherical clusters of small persistent, valvately gaping pods (termed by Morim de Lima, 1985: 73, photo 7, sacelos, though not sacelli of classical definitions), from which the distal part of the replum becomes irregularly detached at dehiscence, giving ready egress to the seeds, are nearly duplicated in some members of ser. Myriophyllae, but are there accompanied by plurijugate, not conjugate pinnae.
Mimosa calocephala of subser. Polycephalae has dense globose capitula recalling M. dolens, but the fmit is a craspedium and the long paleaceous calyx and basally connate filaments are typical of that group.
The taxa that contribute to my expanded concept of M. dolens include these described by Bentham in Flora brasiliensis (1876) and the precursory monograph (1875): Mm. rigida, callosa, ^'meticulosd'^ with two varieties, conferta, acerba with one variety, eriophylla, rudis and asperrima.
To these must be added numerous minor taxa proposed by Chodat and Hassler and a few established latterly by Burkart.
These comprehensive reductions in rank must appear radical, but they are not unprecedented.
The first to suggest that some of these mimosas were artificially segregated was C. A. M. Lindman, who pointed out (1898: 44) that unarmed eglandular M. rigida and prickly glandular M. dolens, both of which had been collected by RegneU at Caldas, were essentially identical except for indumentum, which he considered insufficient as a specific criterion.
He accordingly subordinated his unarmed eglandular var. anisitsii to A. dolens, not to A. rigida.
It must be remembered that most of the species herein subordinated to M. dolens were known to Bentham from only one or two collections, often from one collection by Sello from unrecorded locality in southem Brazil, and of most the characteristic fmit was as yet unknown.
While the types of these are indeed individually distinct, their significance has been steadily eroded in the past century by discovery of intermediate forms.
They now emerge as random points on intersecting curves of variation, ten of which have real or potential value in classification of the complex: i) Stature.
Typical M. acerba has slender, incurved-ascending stems seldom exceeding 6 dm, whereas M. conferta, which Burkart assessed as a taU variety of M. acerba, has, lUce M. rigida or Hassler's numerous varieties and forms of "M. meticulosa,"" stiff virgate stems commonly 6-15 dm taU.
The taller virgate forms tend to have larger capitula than their slender and lowlier counterparts, but I have found it impossible to distinguish classes in terms of stature or growthhabit. ii) Indumentum and armature.
The pubescence consists of spreading setae variable in length accompanied or not by minute gray pubemlence, each type of trichome being independently variable in density, the puberulence sometimes altogether lacking, and the setae sometimes restricted to margins of stipules and floral bracts.
When present and relatively copious, setae may occur on both faces of leaflets, on dorsal or rarely on ventral face only, or on neither.
Gland-tipped setulae occur only in subsp. dolens, but points of glandular secretion, lacking an emergent pediment, appear in subsp. acerba var. uncta.
Straight cauline aculei that ordinarily accompany the glandular setulae of subsp. dolens are occasionally wanting.
Exceptional are the dense fine setae of subsp. eriophylla, which are drawn out into a long silky tail.
Scarcely two specimens otherwise comparable have identical indumentum. iii) Leaflets.
In major cauline leaves the leaflets per pinna vary commonly from six to 25, but in subsp. callosa to 60-odd pairs; the largest of a plant vary from about 5-10 to 30-50 or in var. rudis to 80 mm in length.
Correlation between small size and high number, and the reverse, is general but not exact.
The only discontinuity in number falls between subsp. callosa and the remainder. iv) Glaucescence.
Mature leaflets vary in color from olivaceous (bmnnescent when dry) to glaucous-gray, sometimes of striking blue-glaucous hue.
While most visible in facially glabrous leaflets, glaucescence occurs also in some densely setose leaflets, and becomes accentuated as the foliage matures. v) Venulation of leaflets.
This is ordinarily prominent only on dorsal face and takes two extreme forms.
In one the leaflets are finely nerved from pulvinule and secondary nervules are faint or wanting, and when present expire before anastomosis.
In the other the primary nerves are strongly branched and the secondary nervules are brochidodromous within the callous margin.
When dorsal venation is weak, the marginal nerve, though continuous, tends to be slender, not much thicker than the blade of the leaflet itself, or is raised as a rim only around the leaflet's ventral face; when the venation is strong, the marginal nerve is coarse and often sinuous, and is raised as a rim around both faces of the leaflet.
The distinction between strong and weak venation is, in the long mn, indefinite, as between dark gray and light. vi) Peduncles.
The peduncles, capriciously variable in length from 5 to 50 or rarely 80 mm, are commonly paired in subsp. dolens and solitary in other subspecies, but occasional exceptions weaken this often useful contrast. vii) Floral bracts.
These vary from about half as long as the expanded corolla to nearly as long, and vary from glabrous dorsally to densely comose or lanate with flagelliform setae, the length and vesture varying independently.
The capitulum prior to anthesis varies as a consequence from tmly moriform, or moriform with hispidly protruding bracteal setae, to conelike, with imbricate setose or silky-setose scales.
Size of bracts correlates only weakly with other variable characters. viii) Calyx.
The calyx is most often reduced to a membranous cup or collar less than 0.3 mm tall, but this occasionally bears, either all around the rim or only on the side opposed to the subtending bract, a row of pallid setae.
Burkart (1948: 198) has drawn attention to the variability of the calyx in "M. meticulosa,'' which invalidates one seemingly substantial difference between M. acerba Bentham, with naked calyx, and M. rigida, with completely pappiform calyx.
The complex cannot be divided into specific units by means of calyx characters. ix) Corolla.
The corollas vary from about 3.5 to 5.5 mm in length, with consequent differences in diameter of capitulum at anthesis.
The correlation between girth of capitula and other characters, even when the often larger terminal and precocious capitulum is left out of account, is low. x) Pod.
The individual pod, except for small variation in length and number of seeds that reach maturity, and in density of setose indumentum, is essentially stable throughout M. dolens sensu lato.
Because the distal arch of the replum and its terminal cusp break off irregularly with dehiscence of the valves, the gaping pods, especially after the seeds are shed, appear to lack replum altogether; but young fmits have the replum normal in the genus.
The classification of M. dolens presented below derives from subjective assessments of relative value and meaning of variable characters.
I perceive it as an approximation which comprehensive field and laboratory studies, as suggested by Burkart (1948: 199), are certain to refine.
The dispersal of M dolens has peculiar facets, not least of which is the sympatry of morphologically very distinct forms.
The species is most abundant and diverse in immediately extratropical Brazil and Paraguay, in a band going westward between 24° and 26°S from e. Parana and adjacent S. Paulo.
Of the fifteen infraspecific divisions of M. dolens recognized herein, ten occur in Parana; of these eight extend north into S. Paulo or Minas Gerais, five west to Paraguay, while two are endemic.
From Paraguay we have eight, of which two are highly localized along the Brazilian border, three extend into Argentina, and one into Bolivia.
The subsp. acerba extends to the limit of the species in all directions, and I interpret it as the least specialized and probably the most primitive subspecies.
Within its compass lie the presumably derived and more specialized subspp. rigida and eriophylla, and the certainly specialized subspp. callosa and dolens, the range of each nesting, as it were, within that of subsp. acerba, and overlapping one with another.
In the discussion of ser. Dolentes I have had need to mention repeatedly M. meticulosa Martius, which gave its name to the heterogeneous ser. Meticulosae, where most of the Dolentes known to Bentham are aligned in Flora brasiliensis.
Because of its early date (1838) the epithet meticulosa, if in fact based on some form of M. dolens sensu lato, would be likely to survive somewhere in the synonymy.
Bentham, who certainly had seen no authentic M. meticulosa at the time of his first revision (1841: 381) seems to have had in mind, under this name, the species currently known as M. setistipula.
Later, Bentham substituted meticulosa for his own M. rigescens (=M. dolens var. rigescens of this account); however the known range of var. rigescens in far extratropical Brazil is at odds with the typelocality "in prov. Minamm campis" and puts it outside the known itineraries of Martius himself.
Burkart (1948: 196), foUowing Bentham, employed the name M. meticulosa in this sense, but the usage cannot be sustained.
My searches at Bmssels and Munich, where a type of M. meticulosa is most likely to be found, were unavailing, and I am unable to interpret the brief, non-specific protologue with any certainty.
Consequently M. meticulosa is there treated as a nomen ambiguum (see Appendix I) which I have used in discussion only in quotes, and the eponymous ser. Meticulosae likewise falls into abeyance as untypifiable.
Conspectus of subser. Dolentes Mimosa dolens Vellozo * Eglandular (except resinous var. uncta) and unarmed; lfts not over 25-jug. 352/1. subsp. acerba (Bentham) Bameby a. var. acerba h. var. latifolia (Bentham) Bameby c. var. rudis (Bentham) Bameby d. var. uncta Bameby e. var. pubescens (Bentham) Bameby f var. pseudorigida Bameby 352/11. subsp. rigida (Bentham) Bameby a. var. rigida b. var. rigescens (Bentham) Bameby c. var. foliolosa (Bentham) Bameby d. var. anisitsii (Lindman) Bameby e. var. deterior Bameby 352/III. subsp. eriophylla (Bentham) Bameby ** Eglandular and unarmed; lfts ±30-65-jug. 352/IV. subsp. callosa (Bentham) Bameby *** Both armed and glandular-setulose; lfts to 10-19-jug. 352/V. subsp. dolens a. var. dolens b. var. pangloea Bameby 352.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo, Fl. flumin. icon.
11: t. 34.
1836 & H. flumin. 438.
1881.-Typus sub var. dolente indicatur (p. 589).
Functionally herbaceous subshrubs from woody roots, either unarmed or remotely armed with straight, nodal or infranodal aculei, highly polymorphic in stature, vigor, lf-formula, and especially in indumentum, the usually few or solitary stems including the exserted determinate pseudoraceme 3-16(-20) dm tall, either densely or remotely foliate proximally, exceptionally resinous or glandular-setulose, the foliage either olivaceous (bmnnescent), glaucous, or densely grayor brownish-pubescent, the lfts at least narrowly and often grossly callous-marginate, the 1- 20 capitula mostly solitary, in subsp. dolens often 2-3-nate, globose, becoming hard hispid spheres of persistent, non-articulate pods.
Stipules Unear-attenuate, lanceolate or lance-oblong 3-13 (-18) X 0.5-2.5 mm, 1-6-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (0-) 1.3-5 cm x 0.5-2 mm (in var. rudis attaining 16 cm x 2-3 mm in some ample lower lvs), shallowly sulcate ventrally, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 3.5-17 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments commonly 1.5-15 (in var. rudis attaining 35) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (5-)7-25-, in subsp. callosa to 64- jug., the blades obliquely ovate, ovate-elliptic or lance-oblong from semicordate base, the larger ones(4.5-)5-40(-80) x (1.6-)2-20(-28) mm, aU glabrous (except for omnipresent ciliary setulae) to densely setose or silky-setose overall, (1-)2- 5(-7)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the primary nerves either simple or branched, the branches either expiring or brochidodrome within the marginal nerve.
Peduncles 0.5-5(-8) cm; capitula without filaments (6-)6.5-l 5 mm diam., prior to anthesis either moriform, or hispidulous with emergent bracteal setae, or silky-setose, or (subsp. eriophylla) silky-lanate, the terminal capitulum often a little larger than those next below it and flowering before them; bracts linear-oblanceolate or -elliptic (1.7-)2-5 mm, dorsally either glabrous or variably setose or comose, nearly always setose-ciliate;yZow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, usually all or all but a few lower ones bisexual and fertile, at least in terminal capitula; calyx commonly reduced to a membranous collar or shallow cup less than 0.3 mm, then glabrous or weakly setulose on adaxial side only, less often pappiform, the tube then to 0.5-0.9 mm and ciUate all around with separate or at base weakly confluent setae to 1.2-2.2 mm; corolla narrowly funnelform or subcylindric 3.5-5.5 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave, scarcely thickened lobes 1-nerved dorsally, pubemlent toward margins or rarely glabrous; filaments pink, free or united only at very base, exserted (4-)5-9 m; ovules 2-4.
Pods numerous in each fertile capitulum, crowded into a dense hard stramineous-hispid globe 2—4 cm diam., long persistent after dehiscence on defoliate stems; individual pod sessile, firmly persistent on receptacle, in profile obliquely obovate or oblanceolate 5-14 x 2.5-6 mm, piano-compressed, the replum 0.4-0.7 mm wide, cuspidate at apex, in age irregularly mptured and distally deciduous, the stiffly papery, intemally smooth valves continuous, when ripe valvately dehiscent from apex downward, gaping to shed the l-3(- 4) seeds, the replum and valves alike hispid overall with ascending stramineous setae to 1.5—4.5 mm, mixed or not with an undercoat of fine pubemlence.
Key to subdivisions of M. dolens 1.
Plant unarmed and lacking gland-tipped setulae, exceptionally resinous; peduncles solitary.
2.
Lfts of longer pinnae 6-25-jug. 3.
Stems, lf-stks and peduncles varying from glabrous to densely hispid or pilose, but not silkylanate.
4.
Lfts setose on both faces (the upper face rarely glabrescent) and commonly only weakly nerved dorsally, the midrib simple or few-branched distally and its branches expiring within the corneous margin; margin of lfts slender, foraiing a rim raised only around the ventral face of blade, and setose or setulose on both back and sides (the cilia pluriseriate); if (rarely) the venation strongly developed and brochidodrome, then the calyx setose-ciliate: I. subsp. acerba: 5.
Calyx obsolete or reduced to a cup less than 0.3 mm tall, this glabrous or rarely bearing a few weak deciduous setae on adaxial side only.
6.
Stems not resinous; floral bracts pectinately setose-ciliate; widespread.
7.
Lfts paUidly discolored dorsally in a band around the margin, the larger blades to 5-10.5 X (1.6-)2-3.5 mm; capitula without filaments 6-9 mm diam.; stems usually 1. relatively weak, incurved-ascending; e. Brazil s.-ward from centr. Minas Gerais, w. to Paraguay and Bolivia 352/Ia. var. acerba (p. 583).
7.
Lfts not marginally discolored dorsally; capitula without filaments 9-12(-13) mm diam.; stems mostly virgate erect.
8.
Lf-stks of longer lvs mostly less than 4 cm; lfts of longer pinnae 14-24-jug. and the larger ones 10-20 x 3.5-6.5 mm; common in Paraguay and n.-e. Argentina, e. infrequently to Parana, S. Paulo, and adj. Minas Gerais 352/Ib. var. latifolia (p. 584).
8.
Lf-stks of lower lvs to 10-16 cm; lfts of longer pinnae 7-10-jug. and the larger ones to 25 x 10 mm; local in Parana 352/Ic. var. rudis (p. 585).
6.
Stems glabrous resinous; floral bracts esetose; local in Parana (mun. Ponta Grossa and S. Mateus do Sul) 352/Id. var. uncta (p. 585).
5.
Calyx pappiform, the tube 0.2-0.4 mm, the setae 0.7-1.4 mm.
9.
Longer lfts to 10-16 x 4-6.5 mm; far s.-e. Brazil and n.-w. Argentina 352/Ie. var. pubescens (p. 585).
9.
Longer lfts to 20-25 x 8-10 mm; Paraguay 352/If var. pseudorigida (p. 586).
4.
Lfts at once glabrous facially (the first 1-3 pairs at times thinly setose dorsally) and strongly venose on abaxial face, the raised midrib several-branched on each side upward from near mid-blade and the branches brochidodrome within the margin; marginal nerve stout pallid, usually undulate in profile, forming a rim raised above level of each face of blade and bearing on back a single file of setae (these sometimes reduced to papillae): subsp. rigida: 10.
Calyx pappiform, the tube 0.5-0.9 mm, its rim setiferous all around.
11.
Stout erect or stiffly ascending plants (5-)8-20 dm; longer lfts ±25-37 x 10-14 mm; centr. and w. Minas Gerais 352/IIa. var. rigida (p. 586).
11.
Weak decumbent-assurgent plants; longer lfts 11-16 x 5-7 mm; Parana to Rio Grande do Sul 352/IIb. var. rigescens (p. 586).
10.
Calyx obsolete or reduced to a cup less than 0.3 mm, the rim glabrous or rarely bearing a few weak setae on its adaxial side.
12.
Plants coarse robust, including inflorescence (6-)7-16 dm; rachis of longer pinnae 6-13 cm and largest lfts 1 ^ cm; capitula without filaments 9-12 mm diam.; widespread.
13.
Lfts relatively many and of moderate size, those of longer pinnae 12-22-jug. and the largest of them 10-25 x (3.5_)4_io mm; Paraguay and n.-e. Argentina e. to s. Minas Gerais and Parana 352/IIc. var. foliolosa (p. 587).
13.
Lfts relatively few and ample, those of longer pinnae 7-ll(-12)-jug. and the largest of them 20-40 x 11-20 mm; Paraguay and adj. Brazil (Mato Grosso do Sul and S. Paulo) 352/IId. var. anisitsii (p. 587).
12.
Plants slender, including inflorescence 2.5-4 dm; rachis of longer pinnae 3-4.5 cm and largest lfts 7-10 mm; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam.; local on Sa. de Amambay in n.-e. Paraguay 352/IIe. var. deterior (p. 588).
3.
Stems, lf-stks and peduncles densely softly silky-lanate with fine flagelliform setae; e.-centr. S. Paulo and n.-e. Parana 352/III. subsp. eriophylla (p. 588).
2.
Lfts of longer pinnae 33-60(-64)-jug 352/IV. subsp. callosa (p. 588).
Stems at once armed and stipitate-glandular; peduncles mostly (2-)3 per node of inflorescence: subsp. dolens: 14.
Calyx pappiform, the orifice, either all around or at least on adaxial side, with filiform or subdilated setae to 1-1.5 mm; faces of lfts, floral bracts and corolla-lobes glabrous or simply puberulent; centr. Minas Gerais to s.-e. Goias and s. Mato Grosso do Sul, s. to Parana. ... 352/Va. var. dolens (p. 589).
14.
Calyx obsolete; floral bracts and often either Ift-faces or corolla-lobes with glandular setulae; e. Parana 352/Vb. var. pangloea (p. 590).
352/1.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. acerba (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. acerba Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 378.
1841, sens, str.— Typus infra sub var. acerba indicatur.
Leaflets almost always setose on both faces, exceptionally glabrescent on upper, and only slenderly marginate, ordinarily weakly nerved dorsally, with simple or distally few-branched midrib, the branches expiring within the margin (exceptionally brochidodrome); marginal nerve of lfts forming a rim raised only around the ventral face of blade and setose-ciliate both on back and sides; calyx either minute or pappiform; lfformula and size of lfts variable.
352/Ia. Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. acerba (Bentham) Bameby var. acerba.
Based on autonym generated by M. acerba var. minor Bentham, 1876, I.e., infra. M. acerba Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 378.
1841.-"Brazil, Sello; Tejuco [=Diamantina, Minas Gerais, Riedel, misit] Langsdorff.""—hectotypus, Riedel 5, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1818 (plant at right) presumed isotypus, Riedel 1304, ex parte, US! probable syntypi, Sello 676, +B = F Neg. 7292 Sello s.n.,
G!,
Sello s.n. e Rio Grande do Sul, GH! M. acerba var. minor Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 332.
1876.—"In campis ad Sorocaba prov. S. Paulo: LM«^."—Holotypus, Lund s.n.,
misit Warming, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1818 (plant at left); isotypus, C! M. (?) eriophylla sensu M. Micheli, 1883: 56 (Balansa 1464).
Stems relatively slender, usually incurved-ascending but sometimes virgately erect, 3-7 dm, hispid or hispidulous with setae to 0.7-2 mm; stipules 3-7 x 0.5-1.5 mm; leaf-stalks (3-)5- 15(-20) mm; rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-5(-6) cm, their lfts 16-25-jug., attaining 5-10.5 x (1.6-)2-3.5 mm; peduncles 5-23(-40) mm; capitula at anthesis (6-)6.5-9 mm diam. without filaments, in fmit 14-19 mm diam.; calyx minute or obsolete.
In campo, at edge of brejo, or about campo thickets, mostly 700-1300 m, common and locally plentiful in extratropical Brazil from e. S. Paulo to Rio Grande do Sul, sporadically n. through centr. S. Paulo to Sa. do Espinha90 in centr. Minas Gerais, and remotely scattered w.- ward, in s.-w. Mato Grosso do Sul and s. Paraguay; apparently greatly isolated, near 1600 m, on sources of rio Mamore in Sta Cmz, Bolivia (Samaipata).-n. VIII-III. 352/Ib.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. acerba (Bentham) Bameby var. latifolia (Bentham) Bameby, comb. nov. M. acerba ^ latifolia Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 378.
1841.-No collector or locality mentioned, but among those later cited under the equivalent M. conferta (vide infra) only Sello s.n. antedates the year 1841.—Lectotypus, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 7577 (plant at left); probable isotypi, ^B = F Neg. 13101, K! = NY Neg. 7576 (plant at right).—M. conferta Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30:402.
1875 & /« Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 331.
1876.
M. marginata var. strigosa Grisebach, Symb.fl.argent. (Abh.
Konigl.
Ges.
Wiss.
Gottingen 24:) 120.
1879.- "/^gentina: E[ntre Rios] .
.
. entre rios Yuqueri Grande y Chico, 20.11.1876, PG.
Lorentz 742]."
- Holotypus, identified by Burkart, I.e. sequ.,
CORD (not seen). —M. acerba var. strigosa (Grisebach) Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 201.
1948. -Collections cited by Burkart and duplicated at NY: Ekman 16231 Montes 563\ M. conferta var. multifoliolata fma genuina Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 551 (=P1. hassler.
407).
1904.—"[Paraguay:] Cordillera de Altos, Dec, n. 3709 .
.
. pr. Igatimi, Dec, n. 5613."-Syntypi, G! M. conferta var. multifoliolata fma brevipila Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 552 (=P1. hassler.
408).
1904. "
[Paraguay:] in vaUefluminisY-aca, Dec, [Hassler] n. 6649."-Holotypus, G!; isotypi, NY! P! M. conferta var. multifoliolata fma longepedunculata Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 552 (=P1. hassler.
408).
1904.—"[Paraguay]... ad ripam fluminis Carimbatay, Dec, [Hassler] n. 5818."
— Holotypus, G! M. conferta var. guaranitica Chodat & Hassler, I.e., 1904.—"[Paraguay:] pr. Valenzuela, Jan., [Hassler] n. 7009 et 7009a ... in valley fluminis Y-aca, Dec, n. 6764."-Syntypi, G!; isosyntypi (6764, 7009a), NY! M. acerba var. asperrimoides Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 203.
1948.—"Argentina.
Prov. Corrientes: Dep.
Santo Tome, Cuai chico . .. T. S. Ibarrola 1629, en flor 9.
XII.1945."-Holotypus, LIL (not seen); isotypi, NY! S!—M marginata var. asperrimoides (sphalm.) Gray Card Index issue 199.
M. acerba var. strigosa sensu Burkart, 1948: 201, fig. 33A, lam 23, 1987: 506, fig. 228 (optima).
Stems mostly virgate, simple or few-branched 6-15(-?) dm, hispid (especially above middle) with widely spreading, sordid or yellowish setae to (1-) 1.5—4 mm commonly (not invariably) mixed with gray pubemlence, the lfts forwardly setose-strigose on both faces, rarely glabrous on upper one, the corneous margin 0.1-0.2 mm wide setose along back and sides; stipules 4-11(-13) X 0.4-1.3 mm, 3-nerved; leaf-stalks at and above mid-stem 5-30(-35) mm (some lower ones of some plants longer); rachis of longer pinnae 4- 10.5(-12) cm, their lfts (11-) 14-24-jug., attaining (9.5-) 10-20 X 3.5-6.5 mm;;7^^w«c/£'5mostly 5-20 per stem, l-3.5(-4), exceptionally 8 cm; capitula prior to anthesis hispid with emergent bracteal setae but not conelike, at anthesis without filaments 9-12(-l 3) mm diam., in fmit mostly 19-28 or the terminal one attaining 35 mm diam.; calyx 0-0.2 mm, sometimes adaxially with a few weak setulae.
In either dry or temporarily wet campo, ± 200- 750 m, widespread and locally plentiful over Paraguay e. of rio Parana and s. through Misiones and Corrientes into n. Entre Rios, Argentina, thence e. in Brazil through Mato Grosso do Sul to extreme s. Minas Gerais, S. Paulo, and e. centr. Parana.-H. (XI-)XII-III, the fmiting heads long persistent.
352/Ic.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. acerba (Bentham) Bameby var. rudis (Bentham) Barneby, comb, nov., based on autonym generated by M. rudis var. asperrima (Bentham) Hassler, q.v. infra. M. rudis Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 377.
1841.-"BrazU, Sello.''- Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1822; isotypus, K (hb. Benth.)!; presumed isotypus, Sello 678, P! = F Neg. 38990.-M. rudis var. genuina Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 560.
1910, nom. superfl. M. asperrima Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4:377.1841.— "BrazU, Sello.''-No typus found at K (1986); presumed isotypus, Sello 5427, +B = F Neg. 1299. —M. rudis var. asperrima (Bentham) Hassler, Repert.
Spec Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 560.
1910.
M. rudis var. genuina fma latifoliolata Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 560.
1910.-"Paraguay: In campis siccis Punta Pora,flor.et fruct. immat. mens. Jan.; Hassler no. 10002,a leg. Rojas."
—Holotypus, G! M. rudis var. asperrima fma intermedia Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 560.
1910.-"Paraguay: In campis siccis Punta Pora .
.
. flor. mens. Jan.; Hassler no. 10002,b leg. Rojas."
—Holotypus, G! M. rudis sensu Bentham, 1875: 403; 1876: 334; Burkart, 1974: 435.
M. asperrima sensu Bentham, 1875: 404; 1876: 334.
Tall, coarsely amply leafy plants, essentially different from var. latifolia in fewer, larger (at times much larger) leaflets attaining 2.5-8 x 1- 3.5 cm.
In campo, near 700(-?) m, as presently known of bicentric range: extratropical S. Paulo, Brazil (Itapetininga) s. to e. Parana (mun. Jaguariaiva and Ponta Grossa); and at ±22°30'S on the Brazil-Paraguay border (Sa. de Amambay).-Fl.
XIIn(-?).
Mimosa rudis and M. asperrima together appear to represent an extreme case, not yet effectively stabilized, of that reciprocal adjustment between size and number of leaflets which is one of the principal modes of variation in polymorphic M. dolens.
Bentham (1876: 334) expressed doubt as to whether M. asperrima were more than varietally distinct from M. rudis, and his suspicion has been more than confirmed by subsequent collections, which forcefully suggest that these so-called species are minor variants that can occur in the same population.
Both have been encountered at Vila Velha in Parana: Ekman 16354 (S), comparable to the type of M. rudis, and Smith & Klein 14897 (US), comparable to that of M. asperrima; and again far distant on Sa. de Amambay in Paraguay: Rojas 10002, 10002a, 10002b (G), which Hassler described in a hierarchy of varieties and forms (see synonymy above).
Except for large size and small number of leaflets, M. dolens var. rudis is hardly different from var. latifolia; except in harsh strigose-hispid indumentum it resembles subsp. eriophylla.
The determinate inflorescence and the pod, first described by Burkart (1975, I.e.), are those of M. dolens sensu lato.
Machado de Campos 158 (NY) from Itapetininga is described as laticiferous.
As I failed to find in the Kew herbarium authentic material of M. asperrima collected by Sello or annotated by Bentham, the holotypus of this species may have been the specimen at Berlin that survives (with a fragment at F!) in the form of Field Museum Negative 1299.
352/Id. Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. acerba (Bentham) Bameby var. uncta Bameby, var. nov., omnibus fere cum var. latifolia congma nisi caulibus glabratis resinosis in statu vivo tactu unctuosis, foliolis utrinque brevissime strigulosis, necnon bracteis floralibus esetosis (vix minutissime ciliolatis) diversa. —Brazil.
Parana: Parque Vila Velha, mun. Punta Grossa, 24.11.1967 (fl, frjun), G. Hatschbach (with O. Guimaraes) 700^9.—Holotypus, T^JY.
Habit of var. latifolia, but stems glabrate, resinous (unctuous to touch when fresh); longer p/«- nae ± 8-9 cm, with ±17 pairs of rather distant, obliquely lanceolate lfts attaining ± 1 2 x 3 mm; bracts almost glabrous, the margin microscopically ciliolate esetose.
In campo, known only from the type-collection from municipio Ponta Grossa in e. Parana, BrazU.-H. (?-)I-II. 352/Ie.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. acerba (Bentham) Bameby var. pubescens (Bentham) Bameby, comb. nov. M. meticulosa var. pubescens Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 331.1876.—"Cum forma typica Tweedie legit ad Rio Jaquhy [Jacui, Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU]."—Holotypus, Tweedie s.n. sub nom. "var. hirsuta,'' K! = NY Neg. 1805.
Foliage and vesture of var. latifolia, but stems weaker, diffuse or assurgent ± 3-6 dm; calyx well developed, its tube setose around at least % of its rim.
In dry campo, near sea level to perhaps 300 m, known from the Jacui basin in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, from depto. Rivera, Umguay, and from n.-e. Argentina in s. Misiones (Cainguas; Posadas) and Corrientes (Sto. Tome).—Fl.
XIIII.
352/If.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. acerba (Bentham) Bameby var. pseudorigida Bameby, var. nov., habitu pubeque hispido-strigosa cum var. latifolia congruens sed foliolis magnis 20-30 X 8-14 mm usque, dorso delicatim prominule nervosis, nervis secundariis intra marginem pluriseriatim setosam brochidodromis diversa. —Paraguay.
Canendiyu: in campo Ipe-hu, Hassler 50J2.—Holotypus, G; isotypi, GH, K, NY, P. M. rigida sensu Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 551.
1904; non Bentham.
Intermediate between subsp. acerba var. latifolia and subsp. rigida var. anisitsii, having the hispid stems and narrowly marginate leaflets of the first, but the ample lfts and prominulous brochidodromous venulation of the second.
In campo, near 300 m, known only from the Paraguayan slope of Sa. de Maracayu near 24°S, 55°30'W in depto. Canendiyu, Paraguay; to be sought in adj. BrazU.-Fl.
X-XI(-?).
352/11.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. rigida (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. rigida Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 377.
1841.-Typus infra sub var. rigida indicatur.
Lfts all facially glabrous (or the lowest 1-3 pairs sometimes thinly setose-strigose dorsally), strongly comeous-marginate and dorsally venose; margin of lfts usually undulate in profile and forming a rim raised above level of each face of blade, charged around outer periphery with a single file of forwardly subappressed or ascending setae (these rarely reduced to papillae); secondary venation of dorsal face of blades brochidodrome within the margin; calyx either obsolete or pappiform; lf-formula and size of lfts variable.
352/IIa.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. rigida (Bentham) Bameby var. rigida.
M. rigida Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens, str. —"BrazU, Sello, Martius n. 1090 [corrected in Fl. bras. 15(2): 330.
1876 to Mart. hb. 1088] under the name of M. calocephala Mart. var. majori.
.
."
— Lectotypus, Martius hb. 1088, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1813; isotypi, BR! F! = F Neg. 54859, G! M (2 sheets)! NY (hb. Meisn.)!; syntypus, Sello 160, +B = F Neg. 13651 M. rigida sensu Bentham, 1875: 402.
Stems stout virgate, attaining 8-14(-20) dm, coarsely macrophyllidious, the lvs subglaucescent, the efoliate pseudoraceme of ±5-12 capitula 1-4 dm; stipules 6-9 x 2-2.5 mm, 3-5- nerved; leaf-stalks 2.5-5 cm, at middle 1-2 mm diam.; pinna-rachises attaining 6-17 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 9-15 mm; lfts 6-13- jug., the larger ones ±2.5-3.5 x 1-1.4 cm; peduncles 1.5-4 cm; capitula without filaments 11- 15 mm diam., ±3 cm diam. in fmit; blade of floral bracts either glabrous or setose dorsally, always ciliate; calyx-tube 0.6-0.9 mm, the rim ciliate with pallid setae 1.2-2.2 mm; corolla ±5.5 mm.
In unrecorded habitats, to be expected in cerrado or campo sujo, known exactly only from vicinity of Caldas in far s. Minas Gerais, to be expected elsewhere in southem mountainous parts of the state and possibly in adj. S. Paulo or Rio de Janeiro.-Fl.
XII-? 352/IIb.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. rigida (Bentham) Bameby var. rigescens (Bentham) Bameby, comb, nov., based on autonym generated by M. rigescens Yar.foliolosa Bentham, q.v. infra. M. rigescens Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 376.
1841.-"BrazU, Sello; on the Rio Jacquhy [Jacui, Rio Grande do Sul], Tweedie.'' —Lectotypus, Tweedie s.n.,
K (hb. Hook.)!; syntypus, Sello s.n.,
K! M. meticulosa sensu Burkart, 1979: 231, ex parte.
Technically resembling var. rigida in the syndrome of pappiform calyx and glabrous, dorsally venulose lfts, but the plants relatively smaU and microphylUdious, the stems diffuse-assurgent 3.5- 6.5 dm, the l-l-capitulate pseudoraceme scarcely over 2 dm; rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-6.5 cm, their lfts to 10-14-jug., the largest ±11-15 x 5 mm; capitula without filaments only 7-9 mm diam. but in fmit 2-4 cm diam. In campo, 750-1000 m, along the w. slope of the Atlantic watershed in e. Parana and Sta. Catarina, Brazil and reappearing at low elevations along and near the coast in Rio Grande do Sul. — Fl.
XII-II in upland habitats, perhaps earlier along the coast.—A specimen (C. Troll 152, M), apparently belonging here, is labelled "Incahuasi" [? Cuzco, Pem], an implausible locality; another (Herzog 1683, L, W), from "Cuesta de los Monos, Cordillera de Sta. Cmz, 1400 m, Bolivia," is at present inexplicable.
A comparable disjunction is known, however, in sect. Batocaulon ser. Stipellares, between the distantly vicariant pair M. bifurca Bentham and M. lepidota Herzog.
352/IIc.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. rigida (Bentham) Bameby var. foliolosa (Bentham) Bameby, comb. nov. M. rigescens war. foliolosa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 377.
1841.- "Brazil, ^^//o."-Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
annotated "M. rigescens" by Bentham and as "? var. microphylla" by Sandwith, K! = NY Neg. 1814.—M. meticulosa var. microphylla Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 331.
1876, nom. superfl., apparently an inadvertent duplication of var. foliolosa and based on the same typus.
M. meticulosa var. petiolaris fma intermedia Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 550 (=P1. hassler.
406).
1904.—"[Paraguay] in campo Ipe hu.
Sierra de Maracayu, Nov. [Hassler] n. 5228; .
.
.
CordiUera de Altos, Dec, n. 3667."—Lectotypus, Hassler 5228, G! M. meticulosa var. microphylla fma glabrescens Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 550 (=P1. hassler.
406).
1904.—"[Paraguay] in campo Ipe hu.
Sierra de Maracayu, Nov. [Hassler] n. 5285.
Id. n. 1779 "-Lectotypus, Hassler 1779, labelled "Cordillera de Altos," G!; isotypi, NY (2 sheets)! M. meticulosa var. microphylla fma glaberrima Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 550 (=P1. hassler.
406).
1904.—"[Paraguay] in campo pr. flumen Carimbatay, Dec, n. 5827."—Holotypus, G! M. meticulosa var. microphylla fma hirsuta Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 550 (=P1. hassler.
406).
1904.—Cited under this forma are 6 collections separated into 2 classes (a, b) by leaf-pubescence: Hassler 5321, 5396, 5439, 5614, 5717, 8092, aU G! M. meticulosa var. microphylla fma pubescens Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 550 (=P1. hassler.
406).
1904.—"[Paraguay] in vaUefluminisY-aca, Dec, n. 6821."-Holotypus, G! M. meticulosa sensu M. MicheU in Chodat, Bull. Herb. Boissier 6 (Appendix 1): 40.
1898; non Martius.
Commonly 1-few-stemmed and virgately erect, including lax efoUate pseudoraceme (6-)7-16 dm, the foliate stem varying from glabrous to mfoushispid and often in addition pubemlent, the axes of inflorescence almost always hispid, the subcoriaceous, facially glabrous lfts usually glaucescent; most leaf-stalks 0.5-2 cm, occasional early ones to 4 cm and occasional distal ones subobsolete; rachis of longer pinnae 6-13 cm, their lfts 12-22-jug. and the larger ones 10-22(-25) x (3.5-)4-10 mm; peduncles l-5(-7) cm; capitula without filaments 9-12 mm diam., prior to anthesis either shortly hispidulous or silky-setose, in fmit 2.5-3.5 cm diam.; calyx obsolete or almost so, rarely with a few weak fragile setae on adaxial side of rim; corolla ±3.5-4.5 mm.
In dry campo, from ±200 m in the Parana valley to 550 m in S. Paulo and 750 m in e. Parana, widespread over Paraguay e. of rio Paraguai and adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil, s. into Misiones, Argentina, and e. across centr. S. Paulo to Sa. do Paranapiacaba in s.-e. S. Paulo and e. Parana.-H. XI-III(-?).
352/IId.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. rigida (Bentham) Bameby var. anisitsii (Lindman) Bameby, comb. nov. M. dolens var. anisitsii Lindman, Bih.
Kongl.
Svenska Vetensk.-Akad.
Handl.
24, Afd.
111(7): 44.
1898.-"Paraguay: Valenzuela, mens. Jan. [1894] florens (Anisits 465)."-Holotypus, S! M. meticulosa var. genuina fma macrophylla Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 549 (=P1. hassler.
405).
1904.—"[Paraguay] ... in campis pr. Ipe hu, Nov., [Hassler] n. 5249."—Holotypus, G!; isotypi, NY! P! W! M. meticulosa var. genuina fma oblongifolia Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 549 (=P1. hassler.
405).
1904.—"[Paraguay] ... in regione cursus superioris fluminis Apa, Nov. [Hassler] n. 8040."
— Holotypus, G! M. meticulosa var. genuina fma ovalifolia Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 549 (=P1. hassler.
405).
1904.—"[Paraguay].. . in campis pr. Bellavista, Apa, Dec. [Hassler] n. 8293."-Holotypus, G!; isotypus, NY! M. rigidicaulis Burkart, Darwiniana 18(3-4): 342, fig. 4.
1974.—"Brasil, Sao Paulo, Municipio de Botucatu, 18 km north of Botacatu, highway S. Manuel to Piracicaba, alt. 550 m, cerrado vegetation, leg. Use 5.
Gottsberger 937, en flor 17.
I.1970."-Holotypus, SI (not seen); Gottsberger 2149, 31.
XII. 1970 e loc. typ.,
det.
Burkart 1974, UB! is not isotypic but is authentic! M. rigidicaulis var. ciliata Burkart, Darwiniana 18(3- 4): 434.
1974.—"Paraguay, in altaplanitie et declivibus "Sierra de Amambay," leg. T. Rojas 1-1908, en flor, herb.
E. Hassler 9974."-Holotypus, LIL (not seen); isotypi, G! NY! P! W! In every respect like var. foliolosa except for number and size of leaflets, but the foliate stem often glabrous or nearly so, the inflorescence-axis either thinly hispid or glabrate; lfts of longer/?/«- nae 7-1 l(-12)-jug., the larger ones broadly ovateelliptic to 20-40 X 11-20 mm; calyx obsolete or almost so, the plants differing from var. rigida principally in this character.
In sandy or stony campo, 250-550 m, sympatric with var. foliolosa but of narrower range, locally common along and near the ParaguayBrazil border formed by Sas. de Amambay and Maracayu, thence s.-w. in Paraguay to Valenzuela and e. disjunctly to s.-centr. S. Paulo (Botucatu).-H. XI-III. 352/IIe.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. rigida (Bentham) Bameby var. deterior Bameby, var. nov., war.foliolosae proxima sed omnibus partibus deminuta, caulibus inflorescentia efoliata inclusa 2-4 dm tantum longis, pinnamm rachi 3—4.5 cm usque longa, foliolis 8-12-jugis usque vix 1 cm excedentibus, capitulisque parvis absque filamentis 6-7 mm diam. praestans.— Paraguay.
Amambay: in campis siccis pr. Estrella, 1.1908 (fl, fr gaUos.), T. Rojas in Hassler 70725.-Holotypus, G = NY Neg. 11835.
Erect from woody base, including efoliate pseudoraceme 2—4 dm, remotely setose-hispidulous and minutely pubemlent distally, the leaflets facially glabrous; lf-stks ±12-22 x 0.4-0.5 mm; rachis of longer/7/««^^ 3^.5 cm, their lfts 8-12-jug and the longer ones ±7-10 x 3.5-5 mm, venulose as var. foliolosa; peduncles 1-2 cm; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; calyx obsolete; corolla ±2.7 mm.
In dry campo near 650 m, known only from Estrella on Sa. de Amambay, at 22°20'S close to the Brazilian frontier in depto. Amambay, Paraguay.—Fl. + galled fr. in I. 352/III. Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. eriophylla (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. eriophyllaBentham, London J. Bot. 5: 87.
1846.— "Province of St. Paul, Riedel", expanded in Martius, R. bras. 15(2): 333.
1876 to: ".
.
. e gr. ad S. Carlos: Lund."
—Holotypus, Riedel 425, K (hb. Benth.)!; isotypi, Riedel s.n. but dated 18.
L1834, ^B = FNeg.
1317! US!,
and attributed to Lund, from San Carlos, C! M. eriophylloides Hoehne, Revista Mus. Paulista 10: 659, t. 5.
1918.-"Horto 'Oswaldo Cruz'-1413, F. C. Hoehne, Tatuhy, S. Paulo, em 30.
I.1918."-Holotypus, SP (not seen); isotypus, +B = F Neg. 7^09! M. eriophylloides var. lanosa Hoehne, Revista Mus. Paulista 10: 660, t. 6.
I918.-Mus. Paulista, n. 5610, Dr. Gustavo EdwaU, Morro Pelade, Jan. 1901... ."
— Holotypus, SP (not seen); isotypus, GH! M. eriophylla sensu Bentham, 1875: 332.
General characters of M. dolens, and these in particular: stems stout virgate, simple or fewbranched distally ±3-6(-?) dm, densely softly silky-lanate, especially distally, with fine flexuous flagelliform setae to ± 3-5 mm, the lfts densely loosely silky-pilose-strigulose on both faces; stipules 5-11 X 1.5-2.5 mm, pubescent dorsally like stem, glabrous within; leaf-stalks at and above mid-stem 0.5-1 cm; rachis of longer pinnae 7- 13 cm; lfts 9-14-jug., the larger ones 2.5-3.5 x 0.8-1.4 cm, slenderly continuously marginate, the corneous rim 0.1-0.15 mm wide, densely setulose on back and sides; peduncles 5-15 mm; capitula prior to anthesis sheathed in silky setae, at anthesis without filaments 10-12 mm diam.; bracts 4.5-6 mm, silky-barbate dorsally; calyx either obsolete or to 0.2 mm, glabrous; corolla 4.5-6 mm, the lobes pubemlent; capitula in fmit 2-2.5 cm diam. In cerrado, near 400-600 m, local in the upper basins of rios Tiete and Paranapanema in e. S. Paulo s.-ward from lat. 22°S and in adj. n.-e. Parana at lat. 24°30'S.-n. XII-III. Describing M. eriophylla from flowering specimens, Bentham compared it with similarly lanate M. pogocephala and stated mistakenly that the leaflets are not marginate.
It has the determinate inflorescence and, as we now know, the hard hispid fmiting capitula and valvate continuous pods of M. dolens sensu lato, differing essentially from virgate, amply foliate states of var. latifolia only in the finer, denser and longer, more silky indumentum of stems and peduncles.
A collection from between S. Paulo and Itapetininga (Martins Felipe 4, US) is ambiguously poised between densely lanate subsp. eriophylla and the more densely hispid states of var. latifolia.
The subsp. eriophylla varies somewhat in length of leaf-stalks, giving rise to segregation of M. eriophylloides; but the latter's var. lanosa is precisely M. eriophylla Bentham.
352/IV. Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. callosa (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. callosa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 376.
1841.-"BrazU, 5'^//o."—Holotypus, formerly at B (Bentham, 1876: 330, where misattributed to Luschnath), presumably = Sello s. n., +B, annotated by Bentham = F Neg. 1308\—A second label on this sheet bore Luschnath's name pencilled in by another hand, perhaps to match the coUector named in Flora brasiliensis.
M. setipes Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 376.
1841.— "Brazil, Se/Zo."
-Holotypus, formerly at B (as indicated by Bentham, 1876: 330), presumably = Sello 1154, +B = F Neg. 1374\; probable isotypus, G! M. callosa var. microphylla Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 550 (=P1. hassler.
406).
1904.- "[Paraguay.]... in vallefluminisY-aca, Dec, [Hassler] n. 6792."-Holotypus, G!; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 57252, NY! P! M. callosa sensu Bentham, 1875: 402; Chodat & Hassler, 1904: 550; Burkart, 1948: 191.
M. setipes sensu Bentham, 1875: 402.
In habit, inflorescence, flower, and fmit inseparable from M. dolens sensu lato, but differing from other subspp. by very numerous and crowded lfts, in longer pinnae 33-60(-64)-jug., the largest 4.5-12 x 1.5-4 mm; stems either glabrous or thinly setose distally; leaf-stalks either all relatively well-developed and 2-5.5 cm, or some (many) abbreviated and 1 cm or less; lfts facially glabrous to thinly setulose on upper face or pubemlent beneath, and the marginal nerve either coarse (like that of subsp. rigida) and with one row of cilia, or more slender (like that of subsp. acerba) and with cilia along both back and sides.
In wet campo and along margin of esteros, local at ±200-350 m on and around the Paraguayan Plateau s.-ward from lat. 25°S, thence s. at lower elevations to ±28°S in n. Corrientes, Argentina, e. (discontinuously, and at greater elevation) to e.-centr. Parana, Brazil.-Fl.
X-II (-?), the fmits maturing slowly and long persistent.
WhUe obviously distinct from other subspecies of M dolens in the many pairs of relatively small leaflets, M. callosa has precisely the inflorescence and infmctescence of M. dolens sensu lato.
Leaflets as small and similarly veined occur in M. dolens subsp. rigida var. deterior, so that only a small extension of an already wide range in leaf-formula is required to accommodate it in M. dolens.
I feel some qualms about reducing M. setipes to unquaUfied synonymy of subsp. callosa, although none as to its inclusion within M. dolens, for the type (Field Museum Negative 1308—the holotype is destroyed) clearly had the characteristic fmiting stmcture.
Its stems appear to have been a little more hispid distally than in other examples of subsp. callosa, and the leaf-stalks of median and upper (but not the lower) leaves shorter.
The leaflets of typical callosa are strongly caUous-marginate (like those of subsp. rigida) and uniserially ciliate, whereas those of M. setipes had more slender margin setulose-ciliolate both dorsally and laterally (like that of subsp. acerba).
It may represent a distinct variety of subsp. callosa, or even a parallel independent modification arisen from subsp. acerba.
Modem specimens of M. setipes, and knowledge of its distribution and ecology, are indispensable for its systematic evaluation.
352/V. Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. dolens.
M. dolens Vellozo, 1836 and 1881, U.cc, sens, restr.—Typus sub var. dolenti indicatur.
Stems at once armed and glandular-setose; peduncles commonly geminate (but soUtary in fruit).
352/Va. Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. dolens var. dolens.
M. dolens Vellozo, U.cc, sens, exacto.—"Habitat campis apricis mediterraneis transalpinis prope pagum Cunha [s.-e. S. Paulo, Brazil]."—Holotypus, Vellozo, Ic.
11: t. 34.
1836! M. trachycephala Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 395.
1875 & in Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 314, descr. ampliat.
1876, based on M. insidiosa sensu Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 365.
1841.-"Minas Geraes: Martius, Claussen.^^—Lectotypus, Claussen s.n.,
the truncated fruiting specimen actually described in 1841, K! = NY Neg. 7755.
M. meticulosa var. major Martius ex Bentham in Martius, n. bras. 15(2): 314.
1876, nom. nud. in syn.— "Herb. H. Bras. n. 1090."-Specmiina authent.: BM! K! M! NY! M. dolenssensuBcntham, 1841: 364,1875: 395, 1876: 314.
Stems stout erect, simple or distally branched, including inflorescence l-2(-2.5) m, hispid, viscid and remotely prickly (some branches rarely unarmed); indumentum of four independently variable elements: i) stout horizontal infranodal aculei to 2-5 mm, sometimes extending to back of lf-stks; ii) plain erect setae to 0.7-2 on stems. back of lf-stks, and inflorescence-axes intermixed with iii) gland-tipped setulae to 0.3-0.7 mm, and often iv) minute gray pubemlence; stipules 3.5-11.5 X (0.8-)l-2.5 mm, coarsely 3-6- nerved;/^(2/-5^<2//c5(1-) 1.5-3.5 cm X 0.7-1.2 mm; rachis of longer pinnae (5-)5.5-14.5 cm, their lfts 10-16-, in rare lower cauline lvs to 19-jug., the blades facially glabrous or on dorsal face thinly setose or pubemlent, callous-marginate and serrately ciliolate, the longer ones (16-)20-30 x 6-14 mm; peduncles (1-)2(-3)-nate, (1-) 1.5-4.5 (-5) cm, or the precocious terminal one subsessile; capitula without filaments 8-11 mm diam.; calyx-tube shallowly campanulate 0.35-0.5 mm, the rim usually densely setose with filiform or subdilated setae to 1-1.5 mm, but these sometimes few and only on adaxial side; corolla 3.6- 4.5 mm.
In cerrado, campo, and campo mpestre, 700- 1700 m, apparently rather common along and near the crest of Sa. do Espinha^o s.-ward from Diamantina in centr. and s. Minas Gerais, thence w. through Sa. da Mantiqueira and inner slope of Sa. do Mar into n.-e. Parana; apparently disjunct w.-ward, at head of rio Araguari in w. Minas Gerais (Araxa), in cerrado at 1000 m on the sources of rio Commba in s.-w. comer of Distrito Federal and adj. Goias, and in the Parana basin in s. Mato Grosso do Sul (Nova Andradina).— Fl. (XI-)XII-III. Note: /.
Semir & al. 663 (F), an imperfect specimen collected in cerrado at 850 m, 17 km n.-w. of Piumhi in s.-w. Minas Gerais, suggests an undescribed variety of subsp. dolens characterized by leaves hispid on both faces, small hispid capitula (at anthesis, without filaments 8 mm diam.), and well developed pappiform calyx (±2.2 mm, the tube 0.8 mm, the setae to 1.4 mm).
The terminal capitulum that is the signature of the whole species M. dolens is lacking, but the apically dehiscent pods crowded into spherical clusters are typical of it.
Note: Specimens of var. dolens from S. Paulo were distributed by F. C. Hoehne (1550, BM; 1768, GH; 4749, GH) under the name "M. dolens var. minus-armata."
I have failed to trace a publication.
352/Vb.
Mimosa dolens Vellozo subsp. dolens var. pangloea Bameby, var. nov., var. dolentem caulibus simul aculeatis ac stipitato-glandulosis simulans sed ab ea foliolis, bracteis interfloralibus necnon (interdum) coroUae lobulis setulis capitatis indutis, et ulterius calyce obsoleto (nec pappiformi) diversa; a subsp. acerba var. uncta (subsympatrica), quoad calycem obsoletum congma, caulibus armatis et stipitato-glandulosis, nec inermibus resinosis, ut videtur distantior.—Brazil.
Parana: BR 376, 3-5 km along road to Curitiba from tuming to Vila Velha, 25°18'S, ±29°55'W, 28.
L1985 (fl + fr annot), G. P. Lewis (with Hatschbach, Cervi & Dombrowski) 1391. —Holotypus, MBM; isotypi, K, NY.—Ibid.,
eadem die, located at Fda.
Cambiju in mun. Ponta Grossa, Hatschbach ^5565.—Paratypus, NY.
Wandlike subshrubs 1.5-2.5 dm, at once armed and hispid on ribbed stems with random broadbased aculei 1.5-4 mm mixed with smaller setaculei, and viscid almost throughout with capitate-glandular setulae ±0.1-0.3 mm, the lfts either glabrous or viscid-setulose on both faces, slenderly continuously setose-marginate; leafstalks 2-4.5 cm; pinna-rachises 4-6.5 mm, the interfoliolar segments 4-6 mm; lfts 10-14-jug., oblong-elUptic, to 13-18 x 5-6 mm, the marginal nerve ±0.1 mm diam., the venation prominulous on both faces; peduncles 2-3 cm; capitula without filaments 8.5-10 mm diam., extremely dense; bracts ±3 x 0.9 mm, stipitateglandular dorsally; corolla ±4 mm, the lobes either glandular-setulose or glabrous.
In dry campo near Araucaria forest, ±870- 900 m, known only from between 25° and 26°S in s.-e. Parana, in mun. Ponta Grossa and S. Mateus do Sul.—Fl.
I-III. This remarkable member of the M. dolens aggregate, first collected by Per Dusen in March 1914 (4054, MO), resembles var. dolens in armature and viscid setulae, but the latter here can extend over both faces of the leaflets and up through the inflorescence.
It differs more importantly in suppression of the calyx, which in var. dolens is either symmetrically or asymmetrically pappiform.
In lack of calyx var. pangloea resembles the almost sympatric subsp. acerba var. uncta.
This, however, has unarmed stems, resinous from sessUe glands but not capitate-glandular, and leaflets simply setose dorsally, glabrous above, nowhere glandular.
E(ii.lO).
Series MIMOSA subseries L U N D I A N A E Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Lundianae Bameby, subser. nov., inter Castas et Dolentes amphibolae, a primis aculeis cauUnis sparsis (nunc obsoletis) nec pluriseriatis, a secundis gravius legumine articulato diversae.
Species duae, habitu, ecologia et dispersione conjunctae, altera cum M. dolente var. dolente pube partim glandulosa nexa, altera pube caulina reversa peculiaris.—Sp. typica: M. lundiana Bentham.
Weak sarmentose shrubs armed (except M. insidiosa var. major) on stems and some lf-stks with scattered recurved aculei, the stems in addition either retrorsely strigose (M. insidiosa) or at once hispid and glandular-setulose (M. lundiana); stipules 3-5-nerved; petioles 8-35 mm, espiculate; pinnae conjugate; lfts 10-22-jug., to 7-30 mm, 3-5-nerved; inflorescence an exserted terminal pseudoraceme of globose capitula maturing in acropetal sequence; calyx minute; filaments free; dehiscence of pod craspedial.
Spp. 2, of mountainous s. tropical Brazil, from centr. Minas Gerais s. into extreme n.-e. S. Paulo.
The two species of subser. Lundianae resemhle subser. Castae in most respects, but the stems are armed with scattered, not pluriseriate aculei or, in anomalous M. insidiosa var. major, are unarmed.
The setose element of the cauline indumentum is either retrorsely subappressed and eglandular (in M. insidiosa) or at once hispid and partly glandular (in M. lundiana); neither type is duplicated in subser. Castae.
Gland-tipped setulae are extremely rare in sect. Mimosa, known only in M. lundiana of the present group and M. (Dolentes) dolens subsp. dolens, and as these are sympatric in southem Minas Gerais a genetic connection between them seems plausible.
But the ontogeny of the inflorescence and articulate pod of M. lundiana are those of an unexceptional mimosa, showing no overt influence from M. dolens.
The unarmed M. insidiosa var. major is known only very locally in southem Minas Gerais, especially in the vicinity of Caldas, where it is associated with or a close neighbor of unarmed and eglandular M. dolens var. rigida.
Here again are shadowy suggestions of a reticulate relationship which requires careful observation in the field.
Retrorse cauline setae, similar in orientation to those of M. insidiosa but scabemlous, are found in sympatric M. setistipula of subser. Pogocephalae, perhaps only coincidentally.
Mimosa setistipula is instantly distinguished from M. insidiosa by subsessile leaves and from var. insidiosa by unarmed stems.
Both species of the subseries were included by Bentham in his inclusive ser. Castae.
Conspectus of subser. Lundianae Mimosa * Cauline indumentum both hispid and glandular; always armed.
353. lundiana Bentham ** Cauline indumentum of retrorse setae and minute puberulence; either armed or not.
354. insidiosa Martius a. var. insidiosa b. var. major Bentham 1.
Key to species of subser. Lundianae Indumentum of stems composed of straight, erect or subdeflexed fulvous setae and erect gland-tipped setulae mixed with short plain trichomes, the plain setae mostly 1-4.5 mm and the gland-tipped ones not over 0.3 mm; wet campo of upland, far e. S. Paulo, and possibly immediately adj. Minas Gerais.
353.
M. lundiana (p. 592).
Indumentum of stems composed of reflexed sordid plain setae to ±1.5(-2) mm mixed with fine gray puberulence, eglandular; far e. S. Paulo and thence n.-ward along Sas.
Mantiqueira and do Espinha^o to centr. Minas Gerais 354.
M. insidiosa (p. 592).
353.
Mimosa lundiana Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 395.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 313, descr. ampliat.
1876.-"Habitat in paludibus ad Mugi [=Mogi das Cruces], prov. S. Paulo: Lund."
—Holotypus, Lund 929, C! not found in hb. Benth. (K) in 1984-1986; presumed isotypi, distributed from LE under Riedel 1576, NY! TEX! M. insidiosoides Hoehne, Revista Mus. PauUsta 10: 657, t. IV. 1918. "
Museu Paulista: n. 2400, Lofgren et EdwaU, Campo da Bocaina, 11 de abril de 1894 "-Holotypus, SP (not seen).
M. trachycephala sensu Glaziou, 1906: 178 (8433, C! P!) Shrubs of unknown stature, perhaps sometimes sarmentose, the stems and lf-stks at once armed with scattered recurved aculei 1.5-3 mm, densely hispid with erect or subdeflexed, straight fulvous setae to (0.7-) 1-4.5 mm, and minutely viscid-villosulous with erect gland-tipped and plain incurved trichomes 0.1-0.3 mm, the relatively ample thin-textured, concolorous or ventrally subglaucescent lfts either glabrous or pubemlent facially, continuously but delicately setose-marginate, the inflorescence a simple pseudoraceme of globose capitula either leafybracteate at base or exserted up to 1-2.5 dm from foliage.
Stipules firm, loosely ascending, lanceolate 2.5-10 X 0.6-2 mm, coarsely 3-5-nerved, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (12-) 15-35 mm, at middle 0.4-0.85 mm diam.; pinnae 1 -jug.,
the rachis ±2.5-4.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments (1.5-)2-4.5 mm; lfts 10-17-jug., subequilong except for smaller first (unequal) pair, this 0.8-1.7 mm distant from narrowly lanceolate unequal paraphyllidia to 1-3 mm, all in outline narrowly oblong from semicordate base, abruptly acute, those near mid-rachis (6.5-)7-16 x (2-)2.5-4 mm, all veinless above, beneath 3-nerved from pulvinule, the distally centric midrib faintly pinnate, the inner posterior nerve brochidodrome near mid-blade, the outer one very short, the forwardly appressed marginal setae free for 0.3-1.4 mm.
Peduncles 1-3 per node, 2-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments ±7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linearoblanceolate 1.1-2 X 0.4-0.5 mm, dorsally glabrous 1 -nerved, above middle shortly setose-ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx 0.2-0.3 mm, the rim glabrous or minutely ciUolate; coroUa narrowly vaseshaped 2.7-3.3 mm, the firm cymbiform, bluntly keeled lobes 0.6-1 x 0.45-0.7 mm, either glabrous or microscopically scabemlous exemally; filaments pink, free to base, exserted nearly 8 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, 4-ovulate.
Pods to 7(-?) per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong cuspidate (7-)9-10 x 3(-?) mm, 2-4- seeded, the replum ±0.3 mm wide, hispid on back and sides with erect straight tapering stramineous setae to ±3 mm, the valves at once densely but more shortly hispid and minutely glandular-setulose, the dehiscence and fall of valves not seen.
In thickets and at edge of low woodland at ±500-600 m, known only from upland far-eastem S. Paulo (Sa. and Campos da Bocaina and Mogi das Cruces), Brazil, to be sought in extreme s.-w. comer of Minas Gerais.—Fl.
VI-II(-?).
Map 56.
354.
Mimosa insidiosa Martius, Flora 21(2, Beibl.
4-5): 54.
1838.
Typus infra sub var. insidiosa indicatur.
Virgately erect or, when crowded, subscandent subshrubs attaining 9-20 dm, either armed on stems and dorsal rib of some lf-stks with scattered recurved aculei ± 1.5-3 mm or (var. major) unarmed, the stems, petioles and all axes of terminal far-exserted pseudoraceme of globose capitula densely obstrigose-setose with deflexed sordid setae ±0.5-1.6(-2) mm mixed with minute gray pubemlence, nowhere glandular, the firm subconcolorous, facially glabrous or less often setose-strigose lfts continuously corneousmargined and forwardly setose-ciliate.
Stipules erect firm, lanceolate obtuse 3-9 x 1-2 mm, coarsely 4-5-nerved, always setose-ciliolate but either glabrous or setose dorsaUy, persistent.
Leafstalks mostly 8-30 x 0.5-0.9(-l) mm, of some smaller distal lvs (no further described) shorter; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (3.5-)4-10 cm, the interfoliolar segments 3-9 mm; lfts 10-18(-22)jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.8-1.8 mm distant from lance-subulate 1-nerved paraphyllidia 0.8-2.5 mm, the plane but when drie4 often ventrally convex blades lance-oblong or -elliptic from very obliquely shallow-cordate base, acute or apiculate, those near mid-rachis 1-3 x 0.3-0.9 cm, 2.3-4 times as long as wide, aU veinless above, beneath (3-) 4(-5)-nerved from pulvinule, the prominent midrib dividing blade ± 1:2 and 4—6(-7)-branched MAP 56.
Planaltine Brazil.
Ranges of the three species of subser. Trichocephalae. on each side upward from near middle, the innermost posterior nerve brochidodrome near mid-blade, the outer ones weak and short, the marginal setae forwardly subappressed, free through 0.5-1 mm.
Peduncles mostly 2-3 per node, some solitary, at and after anthesis 12-22 mm; capitula without filaments 5.5-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts narrowly oblanceolate 0.8-1.4 mm, 1-nerved, glabrous dorsally, weakly setose-ciliolate distally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus glabrous, many bisexual; calyx 0. l-0.3(-0.4) mm, glabrous, the rim either naked or with a few slender setulae 0.15-0.5 mm; coroUa narrowly fimnelform (1.7-)2.1-3 mm, the distally thickened cymbiform lobes 0.7-0.9 x 0.4 mm; filaments pink, free to base or almost so, exserted 6-8 mm.
Pods (of var. insidiosa, those of var. major as yet unknown) numerous per capitulum, forming a loose head, sessile, in profile oblong or oblong-eUiptic, ±9-10 x 4.5- 5.5 mm, obtuse at both ends but abmptly apiculate at apex, the replum ±0.6 mm wide, armed with ±3 divergent files of straight erect stramineous brown-tipped setae ±2-3 mm, the papery brown, otherwise glabrous valves similarly but less densely setose, breaking up when ripe into 2-4 free-falling dehiscent articles 2.5—4 mm long; seeds (few seen) lentiform ±2.5 mm diam., the smooth testa livid-brown dull.
Mimosa insidiosa var. insidiosa differs from otherwise similar, at times sympatric M. lundiana by characteristic cauline pubescence of abmptly deflexed plain setae unaccompanied by glandular setulae.
In these species the capitula arise two or three together at most nodes of the pseudoraceme and mature in conventional acropetal sequence, while the fmits are typical craspedia, crowded into a head but not forming a hard ball.
The larger-leaved M. insidiosa var. major, however, is very suggestive in gross facies of M. dolens sensu lato, but differs from typical var. dolens in lack of aculei or glandular setulae, from its var. rigida in pubescent leaflets and much smaller capitula, and from the whole species dolens in organization of the inflorescence, which lacks a larger terminal capitulum.
The two varieties of M. insidiosa described by Bentham appear strongly characterized, but I have seen no modem collection of var. major and its pod is unknown.
The degree of its relationship to M. insidiosa var. insidiosa is consequently very uncertain.
Key to varieties of M. insidiosa 1.
Stems erratically aculeate; stipules glabrous dorsally; rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-7.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 3-5 mm; lfts glabrous or almost so facially, those at mid-rachis 10-16.5 X 3-5 mm; centr. Minas Gerais to e. S. Paulo.
354a. var. insidiosa (p. 594).
1.
Stems unarmed; stipules densely setulose dorsally; rachis of longer pinnae 6-10 cm, the interfoliolar segments 4-9 mm; lfts setose on both faces, those at mid-rachis 16-30 x 5-9 mm; known only from s.-w. Minas Gerais 354b. var. major (p. 594).
354a. Mimosa insidiosa Martius var. insidiosa.
M. insidiosa Martius, 1838, I.e. (=Herb. fl. bras 134), sens, str.—"Crescit in campis editis Serro Frio, Prov. Minarum."
—Holotypus, Martius s. n., labelled "in campis editis distr. adam. ad Tejuco [Diamantina].
.
.
Maio, Junio."
, M! M. retrorsa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 364.
1841.— "BrazU, Se//a"-Holotypus, Sello 229, Kl; presumed isotypus, Sello s.«.,
K! = NY Neg. 1784 (plant at right); probable isotypus, Sello 814, +B = F Neg. 75iO!—Equated with M insidiosahy Btntham, 1875: 397; 1876: 313.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
At elevations and in ecological environment essentially unknown, but found at times in campo and at edge of thickets, apparently uncommon in the highlands of Sas. do Espinhago, da Mantiqueira and do Mar, from centr. Minas Gerais, BrazU s. as far as e. S. Paulo.-R. XII-IV. The epithet insidiosa was not explained by Martius but is well suited to this somewhat vaguely characterized species, deceitfully suggesting kinship to M. pudica, M. incarum and others.
The natural occurrence of M. insidiosa in Pem, thought probable by Macbride (1943: 89), is altogether unlikely.
354b. Mimosa insidiosa Martius var. major Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 313.
1876.—"Habitat in provincia Minas Geraes .
.
. ad Caldas .
.
.
RegneU I. n. 92* " - H o - lotypus, K! = NY Neg. 1783; isovel topotypus, RegneU 1/29**, dated 24.11.1846, S! Characters as given in key to varieties.
In unrecorded habitats, known only from vicinity of Caldas, near 22°S in extreme s.-w. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-R. (?-)II(-?).
E(ii/ll).
Series MIMOSA subseries TRICHOCEPHALAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Trichocephalae Bameby, subser. nov., subseriei Castis proxime aflines, sed aculeis caulinis paucis sparsis (nec pluriseriatis) et ecologia praesertim campestri (nec macrothermica) diversae, a subser. Lundianis caulium indumento nec retrostriguloso nec glanduloso capitulisque plurimis axillaribus (nec pseudoracemosis) arte tantum separandae.—Sp. typica: M. trichocephala Bentham.
Often rank, weakly fi-utescent subshrubs, armed on stems with scattered infranodal aculei, the slender lf-stks also sometimes thinly aculeate; indumentum of stems hirsute or hispid as well as pubemlent, eglandular; stipules 1-3-nerved; petioles 1.3-5 cm, espiculate; pinnae conjugate, the lfts 7-14-jug., 9-24 mm long, 5-6-nerved; capitula globose, mostly or all axillary (a few pseudoracemose in praefloration); calyx minute but sometimes ciliolate;/rw/7 a 2-6-seeded craspedium.
Spp. 3, of tropical e. Brazil, all of very local dispersal, one in s.-e. Para, one in e.-centr. Goias, one in far s. Minas Gerais and adj. S. Paulo.
I have segregated this cluster of three species from ser. Castae not in order to disguise their relationship in that direction, but to emphasize the yet closer bond among them.
Collectively the Trichocephalae differ from Castae sens. str. in scattered, not serial armament of stems, and from partly compatriot Lundianae in the negative quality of lacking specialized setae, whether plain and retrorose or erect and gland-tipped.
The occurrence in M. nycteridis of some sterile diplostemonous flowers at the base of the capitulum is reminiscent of the monocarpic Mexican M. aflinis.
Conspectus of subser. Trichocephalae Mimosa * Of Sa. da Bocaina in far e. S. Paulo and adj. Minas Gerais.
355. trichocephala Bentham ** Of Sa. do Morcego, e.-centr. Goias.
356. nycteridis Bameby *** Of Sa. dos Gradaus, s.-e. Para.
357. pusilliceps Bameby Key to species of subser. Trichocephalae 1.
Capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam., on peduncle ±10-15 mm, this weU surpassed by the subtending lf-stk; filaments exserted 4-5.5 mm; centr. Goias or s.-ward.
2.
Stipules 5-8.5(-10) mm, 3-nerved, persistent; rachis of pinnae 2-3.5(-4) cm; paraphyllidia 1.3-2.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 7-10-jug.; floral bracts linear-setiform 2-3 mm glabrous, surpassing submature fl-buds; fls homomorphic, all 4-androus; s.-w. Minas Gerais (near Caldas) and adj. S. Paulo (Sa. da Bocaina) 355.
M. trichocephala (p. 595).
2.
Stipules 2-4 mm, 1-nerved, deciduous; rachis of pinnae (2.5-)3-7 cm; paraphyllidia minute, less than 1 mm; lfts 10-14-jug.; floral bracts linear-oblanceolate ±1.5 mm, setose-ciliolate, shorter than submaturefl-buds;flsdimorphic, the lower ones of the capitulum staminate and 8-androus; e.-centr. Goias (Sa. do Morcego) 356.
M. nycteridis (p. 596).
1.
Capitula without filaments 2-2.5 mm diam., on peduncle 15-28 mm, this as long as or slightly longer than the subtending lf-stk; filaments exserted ±2.5 mm; s.-e. Para (Sa. dos Gradaus); resembling M. nycteridis in 1 -nerved stipules, minute paraphyllidia and short ciliolatefloralbracts, butflshomomorphic as in M. trichocephala 357.
M. pusilliceps (p. 596).
355.
Mimosa trichocephala Bentham, Trans, p/w/iae 1-jug., the rachis 2-4 cm, the interfoliolar Linn. Soc. London 30: 394.
1875 &/« Martius, segments 2.5-5 mm; lfts 7-10-jug., decrescent Fl. bras. 15(2): 312.
1876.—"Habitat ad CalproximaUy, the first pak 1.2-2.3 mm distant from das provinciae Minas Geraes: RegneU coll. III. Unear-attenuate paraphyllidia 1.3-2.5 mm, the n. 496."—Holotypus, K! = NY Neg. 1780; blades narrowly oblong from obtusangulate base, isotypi, C! P! S ("Rio Verde, 15.11.1874")! deltate-apiculate, those at and beyond mid-raM. trichocephala sensu Glaziou, 1906: 178. chis (12-) 15-22 x 3-5 mm, ±4-4.5 times as long as wide, almost veinless above, beneath deliOpenly branched, weakly fmtescent, probably cately 5-6-nerved from pulvinule, the straight diffuse or scrambling subshrubs, the terete subcentric midrib pinnately several-branched, the brownish-stramineous stems at once hispid with inner posterior nerve expiring near mid-blade, erect, stiff but slender brownish setae to 3-3.5 the outer ones weak and shorter.
Peduncles 8- mm and armed on intemodes and on dorsal rib 15 mm; capitula without filaments 4.5-5 mm of some lf-stks with recurved brown-tipped acwdiam.,
prior to anthesis moriform but setoselei 1-3 mm, the foliage bicolored, the plane thinhispid with emergent linear fforal bracts 2-3 x textured lfts olivaceous above, paler beneath, aU 0.1-0.15 mm; flowers (seldom observed) hobut the dorsally strigose first pair facially glamomorphic, aU 4-merous 4-androus glabrous; brous, all discontinuously setose-ciliolate, the calyx mdimentary or obsolete; corolla narrowly smaU globose capitula single and geminate in a turbinate 1.7-2 mm, the dark purple ovate, shallong series of If-axils on peduncle shorter than lowly concave lobes 0.6-0.7 x 0.5 mm; filaments subtending If, a few shortly pseudoracemose along pink, free to base, exserted 4.5-5.5 mm; ovary ultimate efoliate branchlets.
Stipules erect, at anthesis glabrous.
Pods numerous in globose lance-attenuate 4-8.5(-10) x 0.45-0.7 mm, 1- clusters, sessile, not seen fully mature but when 3-nerved, pectinately setose-cUiate, persistent, nearly so narrowly oblong in profile, including a L^a/-5^<3/^ 3-5 cm, at middle 0.3-0.6 mm diam.; stout erect terminal cusp ±10 x 2.5 mm, the replum ±0.3 mm wide, armed on back and sides with erect straight stramineous setae 2-3 mm, the papery valves umbonately coUiculate over each of 2-3 seeds, at once microscopically pubemlent and thinly setose like replum; dehiscence (probably craspedial) and seeds not seen.
In habitat and at elevations not recorded, but to be sought in thickets or at edge of gallery forest near 1000 m, known only from the classic specimens from the vicinity of Caldas, near 21°55'S on headwaters of rio Pardo in s.-w. Minas Gerais, Brazil, and one collection from Sa. da Bocaina in adj. e. S. Paulo.-R. I-II(-?).
Map 56.
356.
Mimosa nycteridis Bameby, sp. nov., notulis plurimis cum M. trichocephala congruens, sed stipulis abbreviatis 1-nerviis ± 2 - 4 (nec 4-10) mm longis, paraphyllidiis minus quam I (nec 1.5-2.5) mm longis, foliolis 10- 14 (nec 7-10)-jugis, bracteis floralibus vix 1.5 mm longis setoso-ciliolatis (nec lineari-setiformibus 2-3 mm glabris), necnon flosculis dimorphis cujusque capituli imis masculis 8-andris diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Sa. do Morcego at C6rrego Estrema, 35 km n.-w. of Formosa, 800 m, 18.
IV. 1966 (fl, fr jun), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 14961. —Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, GH, K, LE, NY, P, R, RB, S, US. Rank, erect or scrambling, openly branched shrubs to 2 m, the terete stramineous stems and lf-stks either simply minutely pubemlent or both pubemlent and hispid with erect mfescent setae to 1-1.5 mm, the stems in addition armed with scattered recurved broad-based intemodal aculei to 1-2.5 mm, the back of pinna-rachises always ascending-hispid but unarmed, the thin-textured lfts bicolored, glabrous except for discontinuously appressed-setose margin, bright green above, pallid beneath, the solitary or 2-3-nate globose capitula both axillary on peduncle no longer than subtending lf-stk and forming either a short terminal pseudoraceme or several axillary ones.
Stipules subherbaceous lanceolate incurved 2-4 X 0.6-1 mm, 1-nerved, glabrous dorsally, caducous.
Leafstalks including livid pulvinus 1.5-4 cm, at middle 0.4-0.5 mm diam., openly grooved ventrally; spicules 0; pinnae I-jug., the axis of each (2.5-)3-7 cm, the longer interfoUolar segments 2-6 mm, rounded dorsally, 2-sulcate and low-carinate ventrally; lfts 10- 14 jug., accrescent distally, the first very unequal pair less than 1 mm distant from minute subulate paraphyUidia, the blades aU narrowly oblong from obtusangulate base, at apex low-deltate apiculate, those near and beyond mid-rachis 11-24 x 2.5-5.5 mm, ±4.5 times as long as wide, the plane, when dry brittle blades delicately (4-)5 (-6)-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib 3-5-branched on each side, the nerves on either side expiring beyond mid-blade, the outer posterior ones much shorter, the whole venation scarcely prominulous on either face.
Peduncles slender ±10-15 mm; capitula without filaments ±5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the 4-angulate fl-buds glabrous sublustrous; bracts linear-oblanceolate ± 1.5 x 0.2 mm, keeled dorsally, thinly setulose-ciliolate; flowers 4-merous dimorphic, the lowest ones 8-androus sterile, their four longer filaments exserted 4 ^ .
5 mm, spatulately dilated at tip, their four shorter ones filiform, the upper fls 4-merous bisexual, the filaments all exserted ±4 mm, tapering to the anther; calyx of all fls shallowly campanulate membranous, obscurely lobulate and minutely ciliolate, that of sterile fls 0.15-0.2 mm, that of fertile ones to 0.4 mm; corollas turbinate, those of sterile fls 1.5-1.9 mm, with lobes 0.6-0.8 mm, those of fertile fls 2.2-2.5 mm, with lobes ±0.9 X 0.4 mm, the lobes of all submembranous 1-nerved; filaments of all fls monadelphous through ±0.5 mm, lavender-pink distally.
Pods (not seen fully mature) numerous in subspherical capitula, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong ± 10- 14 X 3-4 mm, 4-6-seeded, the replum hispid with stout divaricate compressed tapering stramineous setae to 4-5 mm, the thin-textured valves green glabrous, presumably breaking when ripe into free-falling articles.
In disturbed forest at ±800 m, known only from Sa. do Morcego n.-w. of Formosa (an e. spur of Sa.
Geral do Parana) near 14°40'S in e.- centr. Goias, BrazU.-R. III-IV(-?).
Map 56.
357.
Mimosa pusilliceps Bameby, sp. nov., M. trichocephalae et M. nycteridis manifeste affinis, ab ilia stipulis dimidio angustioribus 1 (nec 3)-nervns, petiolis 13-23 (nec 30-50) mm longis, foUoUs minoribus ±9-12 x 2-3 (nec 15- 20 X 4-5) mm usque, bracteis fforalibus vix ultra 1 (nec 2-3) mm longis alabastro suo brevioribus parce setoso-ciliolatis (nec glaberrimis), ab hac pinnamm rachi breviori 15-25 (nec 25-70) mm longo, flosculis homomorphis, ab ambabus praesertim capituUs minimis absque filamentis e coroUa 2.5 mm tantum exsertis 2-2.5 (nec 4.5-5) mm diametro abstans.—Brazil.
Para: Municipio Concei9ao do Araguaia, on hills ±20 km w. of Reden^ao, near Corrego Sao Joao and Troncamento Santa Teresa, ±8°02'S, 50°10'W, 13.11.1980 (fl), T. Plowman (with Davidse, Rosa, Rosario & dos Santos) 5500.—Holotypus, MG 69082; isotypi, G, K, NY, R, US. Weakly lignescent subshrubs 6(-?) dm, bushybranching from near base, the old defoliate stems terete striate reddish-brown glabrate, the young leafy branchlets incurved-ascending, hirsute with fine erect tapering sordid setae to ±2 mm mixed with minute pubemlence and armed, but only at or shortly below some nodes, with decurved or almost straight, broad-based stramineous aculei 1-4 mm, the lf-axes and peduncles similarly but more shortly hirsutulous throughout, unarmed, the olivaceous foliage bicolored, the plane thintextured lfts glabrous above or on both faces (only a few proximal ones thinly strigose beneath), all remotely or discontinuously ciliate with fine ascending setae, the minute capitula globose, either solitary, or geminate, or paired with a very slender branchlet, in a long succession of If-axils.
Stipules incurved to erect, linear-attenuate 2-2.5 X 0.2-0.3 mm, 1-nerved, glabrous dorsally, setose-ciliate, becoming dry but mostly persistent.
Leaf-stalks including discolored pulvinus 13-23 mm, at middle 0.2-0.3 mm diam., narrowly 2-ribbed ventrally, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of each 15-25 mm, the interfoliolar segments 2-2.7 mm; lfts 9-12-jug., abmptly decrescent at base of rachis, less so distally, the first, often very unequal pair 0.7-1 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.5 mm, all in outline narrowly oblong or obscurely oblong-oblanceolate from obtusangulate base, abmptly apiculate, those near mid-rachis 9-12 x 2-3 mm, 3.6-4.5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, slenderly impressed-venulose beneath, the subcentric midrib tenuously pinnate-branched, the primary nerves on either side of it expiring well beyond mid-blade, the 1-2 outer posterior nerves very short.
Peduncles subcapillary 15-28 mm; capitula without filaments 2-2.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but thinly hispidulous with emergent bracteal setae; bracts oblanceolate incurved 0.65-1.1 x 0.25-0.3 mm, weakly carinate, glabrous dorsally, charged on each side beyond middle with 3-4 ascending cilia; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx-tube membranous ±0.2 mm, the rim with a few capillary setulae 0.3-0.45 mm; corollas narrowly turbinate 1.5-2.7 mm, glabrous, the ovate, dorsally keeled, shallowly concave lobes 0.7-0.8 x 0.4-0.5 mm; filaments pink, very shortly monadelphous around base of glabrous ovary, exserted 2.5 mm; pod unknown.
About seeps on rock outcrops between 350 and 620 m, known only from the e. slope of Sa. dos Gradaus, near 8°S in s.-e. Para, Brazil.-Fl.
IIIII(-?).
Map 56.
This is in most respects similar to M. trichocephala, but clearly distinct in the minute, relatively long-pedunculate capitula and short filaments.
E(ii.l2).
Series MIMOSA subseries RAMOSISSIMAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Ramosissimae Bameby, subser. nov. e ser. Castis necnon Pectinatis excerpta, a Castis veris aculeis ad nodos vel per internodia parce sparsis (nec crebre seriatis), petiolis abbreviatis vel subnulUs (haud ultra 8 mm longis), foliolis parvis (1.5-7 mm usque longis), necnon ecologia campestri et dispersione austrobrasiliensi praesertim extratropica diversae.—Sp. typica: M. ramosissima Bentham.
M. ser. Castae sensu Bentham, 1875: 394, minore ex parte (spp. 26, 27).
M. ser. Pectinatae sensu Bentham, 1875: 396, minima ex parte (sp. 34).
Shrubs and subshrubs, armed either on internodes with scattered aculei or (M. orthacantha) at the nodes with 1 infrapetiolar and sometimes 2 smaUer infrastipular aculei (random branches unarmed), and in addition either hispid or retrostrigulose; stipules I -, or in M. chaetosphaera 4- 6-nerved; leaf-stalks l-6(-8) mm, espiculate; lfts of longer/7mA2<2^ (7-)8-32-jug., 1-3-nerved; capitula globose or ellipsoid, usually numerous and all axillary to a contemporary If, rarely some pseudoracemose in praefloration; calyx either campanulate or minute, neither paleaceous nor pappiform; corolla either antrorsely pubemlent. or retorsely so, or glabrous; filaments free; fruit a marginally hispid, 2-5-seeded craspedium.
Spp. 4, of moist campo and campo mpestre between 700 and 1600 m in upland s.-e. Brazil in lat. 21°30'-28°S, extending from extreme s. Minas Gerais s.-w. to s.-e. Sta. Catarina.
Two of the Ramosissimae, M. oblonga and M. ramosissima, that were known to Bentham formed part of his heterogeneous ser. Castae, and the third, M. orthacantha, was associated with the Andean M. pectinatipinna in the comparably polymorphic ser. Pectinatae, where it has no close ally.
The Ramosissimae are densely branched, multicapitulate shmbs of essentially temperate campestral dispersal, and differ from Castae in scattered intemodal or (M. orthacantha) strictly nodal prickles and in short-petiolate or subsessile leaves.
Although they have no strong differential characters common to all, they possess collectively an aspect materially different from the serially prickly, lowland macrothermic vines of subser. Castae as here understood.
Retrorsely pubemlent corollas of two of the Ramosissimae suggest a nexus with the sympatric, unarmed Ramentaceae.
The straight, precisely nodal and primarily infrapetiolar, mostly straight and acroscopic aculei of M. orthacantha are peculiar to this one species, and a four-ribbed calyx to M. ramosissima.
Conspectus of subser. Ramosissimae Mimosa * Stipules 1 -nerved; stems hispidulous; cauline aculei intemodal and recurved; lfts ciliolate; capitula globose; calyx ± half as long as corolla, strongly 4-ribbed, the deltate teeth incurved; corolla-lobes antrorsely puberulent.
358. ramosissima Bentham ** Stipules 1 -nerved; stems hispid; cauline aculei intemodal and recurved; lfts ciliolate; capitula ellipsoid; calyx ± one fourth as long as corolla, the teeth if any erect; corolla retrorsely or antrorsely puberulent.
359. oblonga Bentham a. var. oblonga b. var. pinetorum Bameby *** Stipules 1 -nerved; stems (usually) long-hispid; cauline aculei immediately infranodal, straight and mostly acroscopic; calyx not over one fourth as long as corolla, the teeth erect; corolla glabrous.
360. orthacantha Bentham **** Stipules 4-6-nerved; stems retrostrigulose; cauline aculei and lfts of * but ellipsoid capitula and calyx of **; corolla-lobes retrostrigulose.
361. chaetosphaera bamehy 1.
Key to species of subser. Ramosissimae Stems subterete; cauline aculei intemodal (displaced from nodes), recurved; lfts of longer pinnae 16- 32-jug., the margin of all finely discontinuously ciliolate.
2.
Calyx about one half as long as corolla, strongly 4-ribbed, and its deltate teeth incurved; lfts of longer pinnae 12~20(-21)-jug.; capitula globose; stipules 1-nerved 358.
M. ramosissima (p. 598).
2.
Calyx about one fourth as long as corolla or less, the teeth (when developed) erect; lfts of longer pinnae 16-35-jug.; capitula ellipsoid.
3.
Stipules 1-nerved; s.-w. Minas Gerais to n.-e. Sta. Catarina 359.
M. oblonga (p. 599).
3.
Stipules 4-6-nerved; s.-e. Sta. Catarina 361.
M. chaetosphaera (p. 602).
Stems 12-16-ribbed; cauline aculei immediately infranodal, usually solitary and infrapetiolar (sometimes also 1-2 infrastipular but these smaller), straight and ± acroscopic; lfts of longer pinnae (7-)8-l4-jug., the margin of all glabrous 360.
M. orthacantha (p. 601).
358.
Mimosa ramosissima Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 394.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 312.
1876.-"Habitat ad Caldas provinciae Minas Geraes: RegneU III. n. 497."-Holotypus, dated 2.
VI. 1865 (ff, frjun).
K! = NY Neg. 7757; isotypi, C! 21888, S! F Neg. M. ramosissima var. ramosissima sensuBurVart, 1979: 205 + map.
Diffiisely ascending or weakly sarmentose, prickly microphyllous shrubs attaining (1-)2-5 (-6) m, freely branching distally, the homotinous stems, lf-stks and peduncles at once gray-puberulent and hispid(ulous) with erect mfescent setae (0.5-)0.7-2 mm, the stems in addition armed with recurved brownish broad-based aculei to 1- 2 mm, the small neat brown-olivaceous lvs subconcolorous, the lfts glabrous on both faces or often minutely pubemlent beneath, finely discontinuously appressed-ciliolate, the solitary or at times geminate peduncles axillary to all or most lvs along the terminal branchlets, forming wide pyramidal leafy panicles of small globose capitula.
Stipules narrowly lance-attenuate 2-5.5 X 0.2-0.5 mm, 1-nerved, dorsally pubemlent, distantly pectinate-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including pulvinus l-2.5(-3.5) x 0.25-0.4 mm, obscurely sulcate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of each 5-15(-16) mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.3- 1(-1.2) mm, inconspicuously ridged and excavate ventrally; lfts (12-)13-20(-21)-jug., decrescent proximally and also upward from near midrachis, the first pair 0.1-0.3 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.5 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from semicordate base, at apex deltately acute apiculate, the longer ones 2.2-4.5 X 0.6-1.1 mm, 3-4.5 times as long as wide, all weakly 2-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib slightly displaced proximally but subcentric distally, prominulous and pallid only dorsally, either from pulvinule upward or only beyond midblade.
Peduncles ascending or widely refracted (3-)5-17 mm; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse ffbuds densely gray-pubemlent; bracts narrowly ovate 0.3-0.8 mm, pubemlent dorsally but not setose-ciliate, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, all but a few proximal ones bisexual; calyx narrowly campanulate firm-textured 0.8-1.2 mm, the prominently 4-ribbed brownish tube glabrous, the broadly triangular or depressed-deltate lobes 0.1-0.3 mm, incurved into the corresponding depression between segments of corolla, dorsally pubemlent; corolla 1.6-2.2 mm, the ovate concave 1 -nerved, scarcely thickened lobes 0.5-0.75 X 0.3-0.5 m; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 3.2-4.7 mm.
Pods (few seen) numerous in hemispherical clusters, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong ±9-13 x 3 mm (2-)4(-5)- seeded, the replum and valves alike pubemlent and hispid with divaricate straight compressed tapering yellowish setae, those of replum pluriseriate and to 3-4 mm, those of valves scarcely shorter, the valves when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles about as wide as long. In moist or wet soils at gallery margins and in campo, recorded at elevations between 800 and 1600 m, discontinuously dispersed along Sa. do Mar from near 28°S in Sta. Catarina n. through e. Parana to w. end of Sa. da Mantiqueira in the e. lobe of S. Paulo and adj. s.-w. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-n. (VI-)VII-XII(-?).
359.
Mimosa oblonga Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 365.
1841.—Typus infra sub var. oblonga indicatur.
Stiff but slender, difftise or assurgent, upwardly freely branched microphyllidious shrubs or subshrubs attaining 1-1.5 m, the brown or reddish stems at once gray-pubemlent, densely hispid with divergent or sometimes distally recurved, mfous or yellowish setae to 0.5-3 mm, and armed on ribs usually remote from nodes with lustrous, gently recurved, broad-based or coarsely setiform aculei commonly to 1.5—4 mm, rarely smaller or exceptionally wanting, the olivaceous, when dry brownish, brittle lfts subconcolorous, either glabrous or thinly pubemlent facially, finely discontinuously ciliate, the ellipsoid capitula single or geminate from all distal If-axils on slender hispid peduncle, sometimes in praefforation shortly pseudoracemose.
Stipules erect-incurved, lanceolate or lance-attenuate 1-7 x 0.2- 0.5 mm, 1-nerved, dorsally pubemlent, setoseciliolate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks either reduced to livid pulvinus or some developed and attaining 6 X 0.3 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the dorsally spreading-setose rachis of longer ones (8-) 10-35 mm, those of flowering branchlets often shorter than those of primary stem, the interfoliolar segments 0.4-1.1 (-1.3) mm; Ifts of primary cauline lvs 16- 35-jug, of distal lvs fewer (no further described), decrescent near ends of rachis, the unequal first pair close to minute subulate paraphyllidia, all in outline linear to oblong, deeply obtusangulate at base, at apex obtuse, mucronulate or acute, those near mid-rachis 1.5-5.5 x 0.4-1.5 mm, 3- 7.5 times as long as wide, weakly l-3(-4)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2-3, simple or faintly 1-2-branched distally, the inner posterior nerve ascending to beyond mid-blade, the outer one(s) much shorter, the venation prominulous only beneath, above immersed but sometimes discolored.
Peduncles (7-) 10-35(-40) mm; capitula without filaments or emergent bracts 4-11 x 3-6 mm, 1.2-2.5 times as long as diam., the obovoid fl-buds either forwardly or retrorsely pubemlent, prior to anthesis either shorter or longer than bracts, these ellipticoblanceolate to linear, 0.5-3 mm, 1-nerved, setose-cili(ol)ate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, in some capitula many or even all staminate; calyx membranous 0.15-0.5 mm, the obscurely lobulate or subtmncate rim either glabrous or minutely ciliolate; corolla turbinate or narrowly vase-shaped 1.3-2.2 mm, the ovate concave but scarcely thickened, 1-nerved lobes 0.5-0.8 x 0.35-0.6 mm, the tube glabrous to thinly retrostrigulose, the lobes more densely pubemlent with variously oriented trichomes; fUaments pink, free to base, exserted 3-5.5 mm.
Pods 2-10 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong or oblong-elUptic 10-14 X 3 mm, 2-4-seeded, the replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, hispid along back and sides with pluriseriate divaricate setae to 4-6 mm, the papery valves pubemlent and thinly weakly setulose, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 2.5-4 mm long; seeds not seen ripe.
Mimosa oblonga is closely related to the extensively sympatric M. ramosissima, which is similar in growth-habit, foliage, and ecology, but is instantly separable by the relatively large firm 4-ribbed calyx with incurved deltate teeth, and less certainly by perfectly globose rather than ellipsoid capitula.
As defined by the foregoing description M. oblonga is polymorphic in small differences of pubescence, armature, size of capitula, and length of floral bracts, but as some of this variation appears to be well correlated with dispersal it is possible to recognize two varieties.
Key to varieties of M. oblonga 1.
Setae of stems to (1.3-)1.5-3.5 mm, smooth or only microscopically papillate; stems armed on all intemodes with slender aculei 1.5-4 mm; capitula without filaments 4-6 mm diam.; range of the species 359a. var. oblonga (p. 600).
1.
Setae of stems 0.5-1 mm, densely scaberulous; stems either unarmed or weakly armed at random intemodes with weak aculei not over 1 mm; capitula withoutfilaments3-3.5 mm diam.; local on w. slope of Sa. do Mar in e. Parana 359b. var. pinetorum (p. 600).
359a. Mimosa oblonga Bentham var. oblonga.
M. oblonga Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens, str.— "Brazil, ^-^Z/o."-Holotypus, K! = NY Neg. 1782; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1347, F (fragm, numbered Sello 4396, doubtless ex B)! G! W! M. oblonga sensu Bentham, 1875: 394; 1876: 313; Malme, 1931: 13, where the type-locality is idenUfied as Santa Catarina.
Cauline setae to 1.5-3 mm and intemodal aculei 1.5-4 mm; stipules 3-7 mm; leaf-stalks subobsolete and to 6 mm; larger lfts 3-6.5 x 0.6- 1.2 mm; peduncles 15-35(-40) mm; capitula without filaments 8-11 x 4-6 mm; bracts 0.5- 3 mm; calyx 0.2-0.5 mm; corolla 1.6-2.2 mm, the lobes either forwardly or retrorsely strigulosepuberulent.
On river banks, in campo mpestre, on rock pavement and in brejo, at elevations seldom recorded but probably between 700 and 1200 m, discontinuously dispersed in s.-e. Brazil from extreme s.-w. Minas Gerais (mun. Camanducaia) and the e. lobe of S. Paulo (Sa. da Bocaina) s.- w. through e. Parana to n.-w. Sta. Catarina.—Fl.
XII-IV. Flowers of the type, and of plants collected since in Minas Gerais and Parana, have retrostrigulose corollas, but on Sa. da Bocaina in S. Paulo the hairs of the corolla lobes are antrorse, and those of the corolla-tube are retrorse.
Most examples of var. oblonga from Minas Gerais and S. Paulo have very short bracts and relatively long calyx (±0.4-0.5 mm), in contrast to longer, often emergent bracts and very small calyx (0.2- 0.3 mm) prevalent in Parana.
The racial situation needs close study in the field.
The single collection of var. oblonga known to me from Sta. Catarina (mun. Joa9aba w. of Ca9ador, Smith & Reitz 9176, NY, US) was identified by Burkart in 1969 as M. affin. ramosissima, but was not mentioned in Flora ilustrada catarinense (1979).
359b. Mimosa oblonga Bentham var. pinetorum Bameby, var. nov., a var. oblonga imprimis setis caulinis brevioribus (0.5-1, nec 1.5-3 mm longis) dense scabemlis, stipulis parvis (1-3.5, nec 3-7 mm longis), capituUs absque filamentis parvulis (3-3.5, nec 4-6 mm diam.), necnon caulibus nunc inermibus nunc parce hinc inde aculeolatis diversa.—Brazil.
Parana: Pinhaes, locis paludosis 885 m.s.m.,
3.
XIL1914 (ff), P. Dusen 7552i.—Holotypus, GH; isotypus, NY.
Different from var. oblonga in short scabrous setae of stems, these unarmed or only randomly armed with weak aculei to ± 1 mm; stipules 1- 3.5 mm; leaf-stalks obsolete or to 3.5 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 8-35 mm; larger lfts 1.5-4.5 x 0.4-1.5 mm, 3-4 times as long as wide; peduncles 7-15 mm; capitula without filaments 4-7 x 3 - 3.5 mm; bracts 0.5-0.8 mm; corolla 1.3-1.5 mm, both tube and lobes thinly retrostrigulose.
In wet campo near 900(-?) m, known only from the w. slope of Sa. do Mar s. and s.-w. of Curitiba (Pinhaes; mun. Mandirituba; Piraquara) in e. Parana.—Fl.
XII-III. The var. pinetorum is notable in the species for weak armature, short, densely scabemlous cauline setae, and tiny moriform capitula.
It appears to replace var. oblonga locally, and form an enclave within the whole range of the species.
360.
Mimosa orthacantha Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 365.
1841.-"BrazU, Sello."
- Holotypus (Bentham, 1875: 396: "only seen in the Berlin Herbarium"), Sello s.n.,
+B = F Neg. 13491; clastotypus (fragm), F! (hb. Benth. caret!).
M. botucatuana Hoehne, Arq. Bot. Estado S. Paulo 1(2): 46, t. 55.
1939.-"[SP] No. 39.543-F. C. Hoehne, planalto aquem de Botucatu, S. Paulo, em 8-937 cultivado de sementes no Jardim Botanico do Estado e alii florida em Margo 1939."—Holotypus, SP (not seen); isotypi, K! S! US! M. orthacantha sensu Bentham, 1875: 396; 1876: 315.
Shrubs 1.5-2.5 m, diffusely branched when solitary but when crowded simpler and virgate, the 12-16-ribbed canaliculate hornotinous branches as a mle densely or remotely hispid with perpendicular tapering stramineous setae to 2-6 mm mixed with minute incurved pubemlence (but some distal branches of some plants esetose), all in addition armed at most nodes with one straight ascending stramineous infrapetiolar aculeus to 3-10 mm accompanied or not on either side by a similar but shorter infrastipular one, the small crowded primary lvs often subtending a fascicle of 2-3 similar but smaller ones, the lfts dull olivaceous concolorous, facially and marginally glabrous, the infforescence a stiff terminal virgate, leafy-bracteate or distally efoliate pseudoraceme of globose capitula attaining 1-3 dm in length.
Stipules erect subherbaceous Unear-attenuate 3.5-8 X 0.4-0.8 mm, glabrous or remotely ciliate proximally, strongly 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including usually livid pulvinus 2-8 x 0.3-0.4 mm, at apex on each side with 1-3 setae; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 7- 17 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.7-1.4 mm; lfts (7-)8-l4-jug., distally accrescent, the smaU first pair (0.5-)0.9-2 mm distant from ovate or subulate, green or reddish paraphyllidia 0.2-0.5 mm, the blades oblanceolate from shortly obtusangulate base, obtuse or truncate, those at and beyond mid-rachis 3.5-7 x 0.9-1.5 mm, 3.2- 4.6 times as long as wide, all veinless on upper face, beneath 2-nerved from pulvinule, the simple midrib only a little forwardly displaced, the posterior nerve produced far beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles either solitary or geminate 11-27 mm; capitula without filaments 5.5-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid 4-keeled ff-buds glabrous; bracts membranous, weakly 1-nerved 0.5-0.8 x 0.1-0.2 mm, ^ahrous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate and smaller than the rest; calyx membranous campanulate 0.3-0.5 mm, obscurely lobulate and sometimes asymmetrically so, closely investing base of corolla; corolla narrowly funnelform (or that of lowest ffs turbinate), (2-)2.2-2.7 mm, the scarcely thickened ovate concave lobes (0.4-)0.6-0.8 x 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 5-8.5 mm.
Pods to 12 or more per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately narrow-oblong ± 20 x 4 mm, 4-5-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum ±0.5 mm diam., produced into an apical cusp ±2 mm, armed along back and sides with erect, laterally compressed stramineous setae 4-7 mm, the papery brown, finely venulose and densely minutely papillate valves breaking up when ripe into free-falling rhombic-elliptic articles ±4-5 mm long; seeds obliquely basipetal, not seen ripe.
In open stony campo, about rock-outcrops, and at edge of campo thickets or of riverine woodland at ±800-1000 m, apparently local, known only from the headwaters of rio Pardo and n. slope of Sa.
Paranapiacaba in s.-centr. S. Paulo (Botucatu and Pardinho, near 23°S; S. Miguel Arcanjo), and from the sources of rio Tibagi in e.- centr. Parana (mun. Arapoti, Castro, Tibagi and Wenceslao Braz, close to 25°S).—Fl.
X-III. From what can be made out from the clear Field Museum photograph of the destroyed type, supplemented by Bentham's description of it, it appears that the long-obscure M. orthacantha was based on an esetose example of the species subsequently described by Hoehne as M. botucatuana.
Except for its hispid indumentum the latter agrees in every observable detail with M. orthacantha, and most strikingly so in the form of the ascending infrapetiolar spurlike aculei.
The hispid bristles of M. botucatuana are seen in modem collections from Parana to be variable in length and density between branches of one collection, and Hatschbach 14506 (NY) includes one branch completely shom of setae.
Therefore setose M. botucatuana and esetose M. orthacantha are interpreted here as random variants of one species.
361.
Mimosa chaetosphaera Bameby, stat. & nom. nov. M. ramosissima var. ulei Burkart in Reitz, Fl. ilustr. catarin.
LEGU/I: 208.
1979.—"Santa Catarina: Serra Geral, Capivare, leg. Ernst Ule No. 1734 (mar9o de 1891)."-Holotypus, HBG! = NY Neg. 11841; isotypi, P! SI (not seen).—Non M. ulei Taubert, 1896.
Apparently erect, microphyllidious shrub of unknown stature, the slender livid branches armed on most intemodes with 1-3 slender recurved aculei 1-2 mm and together with peduncles thinly retrostrigulose with very slender appressed, microscopically scabemlous setulae to 0.5 mm, the very short petioles and pinna-rachises more loosely and antrorsely strigulose-pilosulous, the closely imbricate lfts brown when dry, concolorous, facially glabrous, tenuously setulose-ciliolate, the oblong capitula axillary solitary.
Stipules firm erect, lance-oblong ±1.5-3 x 0.5-1 mm, glabrous dorsally, ciliolate, 4-6 nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including pulvinus 1.5-3 X 0.3-0.5 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 20-28 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.3- 0.8(-l) mm; lfts (22-)25-32-jug. (of some lower lvs, no further described, only 13-20-jug.), decrescent at each end of rachis but otherwise subequilong, the tiny first pair close to pulvinus, the plane blades narrowly lance-eUiptic from auriculate base, deltately acute or apiculate, those near mid-rachis 2.5-4.5 x 0.6-0.9 mm, 3.9-5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 2-3- neved from pulvinule, the slender simple midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2-3, forwardly arched distaUy, the weak inner posterior nerve expiring near mid-blade, the outer one very short or obsolete.
Peduncles 2-2.5 cm; capitula prior to and during anthesis not seen, but the mature receptacle 6-11 mm, the young capitula presumably moriform and ±4 mm diam.; bracts linearoblanceolate 0.5-0.8 X 0.2 mm, 1-nerved, minutely ciliolate near tip, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, apparently mostly bisexual; calyx campanulate, shallowly 4-lobulate, including ciliola of rim not over 0.4 mm; corollas narrowly vase-shaped 1.6-1.7 mm, retrostrigulose from base upward, the cymbiform but scarcely thickened, dorsally carinate lobes ±0.6 X 0.5 mm; filaments (probably pink) free to base, exserted 2-2.5 mm.
Pods numerous in subspherical (but not incompressible) clusters, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong or oblong-eUiptic 7-12.5 X 3 mm (1-)2-3-seeded, the replum 0.5 mm wide, contracted distally into an erect cusp 0.5- 2 mm, armed along back and sides with straight erect, basally compressed, distally tapered stramineous setae to 4-6 mm, the papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, pubemlent and forwardly strigose overall but not hispid like replum, not known at full maturity but presumably breaking into free-falling articles, these ±3-4.5 mm long. In wet or swampy thickets along streams, at unrecorded elevation, knownly only from the type-locality on the w. slope of Sa. do Mar in municipio Bom Jardim da Serra, s.-e. Sta. Catarina, BrazU.-H. XII-I(-?).
While M. chaetosphaera is superficially similar to M. ramosissima, its indumentum, stipules, leaffet-numbers, elongate receptacle of capitulum, and especially its small ribless calyx with erect teeth are so different that I see no alternative to according it the specific rank tentatively mentioned in the protologue.
These differences may be more easily visualized when set out in key form: a. Pubescence of stems and peduncles antrorsely spreading; stipules 1-nerved; rachis of longer pinnae 5-16 mm, bearing 12-21 pairs of lfts; receptacle of capitula 3-4 mm long; calyx 0.8-1.2 mm, coarsely 4-ribbed, the deltate lobes incurved. .. M. ramosissima. a. Pubescence ofstems and peduncles antrorsely appressed; stipules 4-6-nerved; rachis oflonger pinnae 20-28 mm, bearing 20-32 pairs of lfts; receptacle ofcapitula 6-11 mm long; calyx including teeth and setular ciUa ±0.4 mm, the tube not ribbed, the teeth erect M. chaetosphaera.
E(ii.l3).
Series MIMOSA subseries SERRAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Serrae Bameby, subser. nov., inter Mimosas veras caulibus acute 3-4-angulatis et secus angulos seriatim pluriaculeatis, stipvUis striatim 12-25- nerviis, foliolis ±25-35-jugis marginatis necnon infforescentia longe pseudoracemosa exserta illustres et affinitatis dubiae.—Sp. unica: M. serra Burkart.
Softly woody subshrubs with sharply 3-4-angulate stems armed on angles with files of cat's claw aculei; stipules striately 12-25-nerved; petioles 2-8 cm, espiculate; pinnae conjugate, the lfts 25-35-jug., 4-5-nerved, continuously marginate; flowers capitate, the capitula pseudoracemose exserted; calyx minute; corolla glabrous; fruit a 2-4-articulate craspedium.
Sp.
1, of moist campo in the Araucaria belt of e. Parana and adj. Sta. Catarina, Brazil.
A syndrome of angled stem, striate stipules, continuously marginate leaffets and upland temperate habitat amply distinguish M. serra from the core of ser. Castae, to which it was referred by Burkart.
No other extratropical mimosa has sharply angled stems armed withfilesof recurved prickles, and the few that have striate manynerved stipules either are unarmed, or are small herbs with axillary peduncles, or have more than one pair of pinnae per leaf.
No species known to me seems closely akin to M. serra, and I have accordingly referred it to a monotypic subgroup of ser. Mimosa.
362.
Mimosa serra Burkart in Reitz, Fl. ilustr. catarin.
LEGU(l): 200, est. 32, 33.
1979.- "BrasU: Parana, G. Hatschbach 13792."
- Holotypus, collected 10 km w. of S. Mateus do Sul, 9.
II. 1966 (ff), SI (not seen); isotypi, NY! P! RB!-Topotypus fmct, 1.
X.1969, Hatschbach 22283, NY! Subshrubs with laxly decumbent or weakly assurgent, simple or few-branched, distantly foliate, sharply 3-4-angulate, glabrous or densely pubemlent stems armed along the stem-angles and dorsal rib of lf-stks with files of recurved broad-based, stramineous or brownish aculei 1- 4 mm, the brownish-olivaceous foliage concolorous, the lfts glabrous facially, their margin continuously or subcontinuously appressed-setoseciliate, the globose capitula solitary or geminate in an efoliate, simple or few-branched panicle of pseudoracemes projected 1-3.5 dm above developed lvs.
Stipules papery or becoming so, ovate or broadly triangular obtuse 2.5-12 x 2-7 mm, glabrous on both faces, striately 12-25-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (disregarding diminished distal lvs) 2-8 cm, at middle 0.5-1 mm diam., the narrow ventral groove bridged at apex but espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 4-8 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-3.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 25-35-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the unequal first pair 0.8- 1.6 mm distant from ovate or elliptic paraphyllidia 0.3-0.8 mm, the blades oblong-eUiptic or narrowly oblong from obtusangulate or shallowly semicordate base, abmptly acuminulate, the longer ones 6.5-19 x (2-)2.4-3.8 mm, 2.8-5.7 times as long as wide, all slenderly 4-5-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib faintly pinnate distally, the one anterior and the inner posterior nerve produced almost to blade apex, the outer posterior ones much shorter.
Peduncles 6-20 mm; capitula without filaments 5.5-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid fl-buds glabrous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some proximal ones staminate; calyx membranous 0.15-0.5 mm, minutely denticulate, the rim glabrous or with a few minute setulae; corolla narrowly funnelform 2.3-3.2 mm, the ovate membranous 1-nervedlobes ±0.9 x 0.5-0.8 mm, at apex cucullate but scarcely thickened; filaments pink, free, exserted 4.5-6 mm.
Pods (few seen) sessile, in profile oblong 12-16 x 4-5 mm, the replum 0.5-0.7 mm wide, armed along back and sides with divaricate stramineous setae 1- 4.5 mm, the papery glabrous valves low-convex over each seed, breaking up when ripe into freefalling articles ±4^.5 mm long; seeds plumply lenticular, fusco-castaneous, 2.6-3 mm long. In boggy campo (varjedo) or in brejo, ±750 m, endemic to the upper basin of rio Igua9u in s.-centr. Parana and adj. Sta. Catarina, Brazil.- Fl.
I-III. In the context of unijugate haplostemonous Mimosa of extratropical Brazil M. serra is instantly distinguished by sharply 3-4-angled prickly stems, broad, striately venulose stipules, and exserted pseudoracemes.
It appears to have no reaUy close relatives, but is technically similar to M. lundiana, M. trichocephala and M. pusilliceps.
Burkart mentioned as comparable M. insidiosa and M. lundiana (as insidiosoides).
The first differs in retrorsely setose stems, the second in partly glandular indumentum, and both in 3- 5 (not 12-25)-nerved stipules.
The species was collected first, near Guarapuava, by Erik Ekman (S, sub M. acutangula, nom. nud.!).
E(ii.l4).
Series MIMOSA subseries SPARSAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Sparsae Bameby, subser. nov., inter subser. Obstrigosas et Pudicas amphibola nec uUo signo exclusivo omnibus suis speciebus communi ab utraque diversa, ab Obstrigosis caulium vel pedunculomm setis retrorsis oblique basifixis teretibus (nec basi obcompressis calcaratis) vel antrorsis vel nullis, a Pudicis conjugato-pinnatis aut aculeis caulinis rectis aut setis caulinis retrorsus appressis nulUsve abstans.—Sp. typica: M. sparsa Bentham.
M. sect. Mimosa ser. Obstrigosae sensu Bentham, 1875: 408, ex parte (spp. 110, 111), exclus. typ.
Shrubs, mostly small, and subshrubs, and one functionally herbaceous from woody root, the stems bearing scattered lvs and almost always exclusively axillary peduncles (some shortly pseudoracemose in earliest anthesis), armed at or below nodes with 1-3 aculei or unarmed, the aculei straight to recurved; indumentum of minute pubemlence (sometimes scant or lacking) and setae, and these often sparse or lacking except along back of pinna-rachises, the setae of stems, lf-stks and especially peduncles often retrorsely appressed but elsewhere antrorsely appressed or spreading, the stems in M. glabra glabrous; stipules 1-8-nerved; lf-stks (1-)2-55 mm, espiculate; lfts of longerpinnae (6-)l-2>2-iug.,
the margin either glabrous, or discontinuously ciliate, or continuously marginate; capitula globose or plumply ellipsoid; calyx in most (0-)0.1-1.45 mm, the rim scarcely toothed or tmncate, but in M. pseudocallosa 0.6-0.9 mm and distinctly lobulate, in M. prionopus paleaceous; corolla (1.5-)2- 3.3 mm; filaments commonly free or monadelphous only below the ovary, in M. gymnas, M. prionopus and M. pseudocallosa united through 0.4-1 mm; pods (unknown in M. prionopus, M. pseudocallosa and M. atlantica) of most subsessile 2-8-seeded compressed craspedia with replum ±0.4-0.5 mm wide, in M. glabra turgid, with replum to 2 mm wide and valves falling in one piece.
Spp. 8, of s.-e. Brazil and perhaps adj. Umguay, all but one extratropical and mostly of upland and montane habitats on the w. slope of the coastal Cordillera, one in lowland Atlantic Parana, one extending n. along Sa. da Mantiqueira from extreme e. S. Paulo to s. Sa. do Espinha90 in centr. Minas Gerais.
The loosely knit, inexactly definable subser. Sparsae is built up around a nucleus of species characterized by stems, petioles and peduncles, or at least the last, retrostrigulose with terete, basifixed or obliquely basifixed (but not dorsally ffattened and calcarate) setae.
The conceptually typical Sparsae are: fmtescent M. monticola, armed with recurved aculei and with leaffets lacking a continuous pallid margin; and M. sparsiformis, different in principally straight aculei, together with M. sparsa, different at once in straight aculei and continuous leaflet-margin.
By concatenation M. atlantica is drawn into the orbit of the subseries through close resemblance to M. sparsiformis, and also M. gymnas, through resemblance to M. sparsiformis, even though in these two species all or almost all retrorse setae, an initial signature of the subseries, are suppressed.
Peripheral here is M. glabra, which resembles M. sparsa in armament and leaflet-margin, but bears a turgid, valvately dehiscent pod with broad septum unlike the fmit of any related species.
The incompletely known M. pseudocallosa, for which Burkart could find no probable close ally in the genus, lacks retrorse setae and is unique (except for M. prionopus) among haplostemonous mimosas in dilated paraphyllidia and unusual in subser. Sparsae, if it indeed belongs here, in its relatively long, distinctly toothed calyx.
Mimosa prionopus, although anomalous in ser. Sparsae in regard to the paleaceous calyx, provides a nexus between M. pseudocallosa, until now lacking any close relative, and the nucleus of subser. Sparsae.
The distributional and ecological unity of subser. Sparsae lends plausibility to its existence as a genetically coherent group within the complex of conjugate-pinnate eu-mimosas, despite the impossibility of a neat definition in macromorphological terms.
Conspectus of ser. Sparsae Mimosa * Lft-margin either glabrous, or weakly discontinuously setulose, not continuously pallid-marginate; stems frutescent, armed with straight, horizontal or widely ascending intemodal aculei; peduncles often but not invariably retrostrigulose; paraphyllidia 1-nerved; Parana, Sta. Catarina.
363. sparsiformis Bameby 364. atlantica Bameby ** Lft-margin of *; stems fmtescent, weakly armed with recurved intemodal aculei; peduncles mostly retrostrigulose; paraphyllidia 1 -nerved; s. Minas Gerais to Parana.
365. monticola Dusen a. monticola h. schwackeana Bameby 366. gymnas Bameby *** Lft-margin continuous, eciliate; stems fmticose, armed with straight intemodal aculei; paraphyllidia 1 -nerved; peduncles retrostrigulose; fruit a craspedium with narrow replum (as in all the foregoing); Rio Grande do Sul and perhaps Uruguay.
367. sparsa Bentham **** Everything of *** except for lack of retrorse setae and the fruit with broad replum and continuous valves; Rio Grande do Sul. 368. glabra Bentham ***** Lft-margin at once continuously marginate and forwardly setose-ciliate; petioles strongly compressed throughout, bisulcate ventrally, and densely retrosetose-ciliate; stems tetragonal, suffruticose to 15 m, unarmed; stipules and paraphyllidia ovate, thick-textured; calyx-teeth fimbriate; fruit unknown; e. Parana.
368bis. prionopus Bameby ****** Lft-margin at once continuously marginate and ciliate; stems terete herbaceous 3-5 dm, glabrous, unarmed; paraphyllidia dilated 3-5-nerved; fruit unknown; n.-e. Sta Catarina.
369. pseudocallosa Burkart Key to species of subser. Sparsae I. Margin of lfts either glabrous or discontinuously setose-ciliate, or if continuously pallid-marginate the margin itself ciliate.
2.
Stems tetragonal unarmed; petioles strongly dorsiventrally compressed, bisulcate on each face, densely retrosetose along each margin; stipules and paraphyllidia ± dilated and of thick texture; calyx paleaceous with lacerate lobes; local in e. Parana 368bis.
M. prionopus (p. 611).
2.
Stems terete or almost so, often but not always armed; petioles terete or little compressed, if at all dorsiventrally compressed then esetose; stipules dilated only in rare M. pseudocallosa of e. Sta. Catarina, and the calyx-lobes of this entire.
3.
Frutescent, the stems 5-10 dm or more and at least sparsely, often strongly armed on intemodes; if aculei (exceptionally) lacking, the stems well over 5 dm; paraphyllidia at base of pinnae subulate 1 -nerved or imperceptibly nerved.
4.
Aculei weak, recurved, 0.5-2 mm (rarely lacking on some stems, but the lfts then glabrous or weakly distantly ciliolate); s. Minas Gerais to Parana.
5.
Young stems, petioles and peduncles all retrostrigulose; stipules striately 5-8-nerved; pinna-rachis of larger lvs 8-26 mm and larger lfts 2.5-7 mm; upland campos of Sa. da Mantiqueira about common boundary of Minas Gerais, Rio de Janeiro and S. Paulo. .. 365.
M. monticola (p. 607) 5.
Young stems and petioles glabrous, only the peduncles weakly retrostrigulose; stipules 1- 4-nerved; pinna-rachis of larger lvs 18-55 mm and larger lfts (6-)7-17 mm; e. Parana and immediately adj. S. Paulo 366.
M. gymnas (p. 609).
4.
Aculei stout straight 2-9 mm (lacking, in Sta. Catarina, in a rare state of M sparsiformis, but the lfts then closely, subcontinuously setose-ciliate); Parana to Sta. Catarina.
6.
Lvs relatively small, the longer petioles 7-17 mm, the longer pinna-rachises 15-35 mm; lfts 5.5-10.5 mm; upland campos of s.-centr. Sta. Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul 363.
M. sparsiformis (p. 606).
6.
Lvs relatively ample, the longer petioles 30-55 mm, the longer pinna-rachises 80-110 mm; longer Uts 12-20 mm; lowland (±150 m) Atiantic Parana 364.
M. atlantica (p. 607).
3.
Stems herbaceous 3-5 dm; aculei 0; paraphyllidia suborbicular 3-5-nerved; lfts of longer pinnae 20-32-jug.; rare sp. of upland n.-e. Sta. Catarina 369.
M. pseudocallosa (p. 612).
Margin of lfts at once corneous, pallid, smooth and glabrous; Rio Grande do Sul and perhaps Umguay; stems armed with straight intemodal aculei.
7.
Petioles 5-15 mm; lfts 1-nerved; pod strongly compressed, potentially 6-8-seeded, the replum ±0.4 mm wide, the ripe valves articulate 367.
M. sparsa (p. 609).
7.
Petioles 2-4.5 mm; lfts 3-nerved; pod turgid, 2-5-seeded, the replum ±2 mm wide, the ripe valves falling from replum in one piece 368.
M. glabra (p. 610).
363.
Mimosa sparsiformis Bameby, sp. nov., hucusque cum affini M. sparsa Bentham controversa, foliomm magnitudine et foliolomm numero ac venatione manifeste diversa: petioli 7-17 (nec 2-4.5) mm longi; pinnamm longiomm rachis 15-35 (nec 6-14) mm longa, et foliola usque 17-22-juga; foliola 2-3-nervia margine setoso-ciliata (nec 1-nervia margine continua esetosa cincta), majora 5.5-10.5 x 1.2-1.8 (nec 3-4.5 x 0.6-0.8) mm.-BrazU.
Rio Grande do Sul: Pinhal, Queimado, 23.1.1964 (fl), E. Pereira 8557 = G. Pabst 75i2.-Holotypus, NY; isotypi, BRADE, NY, R. Erect, stiffly branched shrubs attaining 1-2 m, either unarmed or more often armed on internodes with two infrastipular and one distantly displaced infrapetiolar, straight horizontal or widely ascending, broad-based aculei 2-7 mm, the terete reddish stems glabrous except for rare, sharply deffexed basifixed setae ± I mm, the pinna-rachises thinly antrorse-setose, the peduncles either glabrous or charged under the capitulum with a few deffexed setae, the lfts quite glabrous facially, subcontinuously marginate and setoseciliate, the globose capitula solitary and paired in many If-axils, sometimes brieffy pseudoracemose prior to anthesis but immersed in fmit.
Stipules firm erect, lance-acuminate 3-5 x 0.6- 1.2 mm, prominently 3-5-nerved dorsally, thinly setose-ciliolate or glabrous, persistent.
Leafstalks of larger lvs 7-17 x 0.3-0.4 mm, obscurely sulcate; spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 15- 35 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-1.7 mm; lfts of larger lvs 17-22-jug., decrescent near each end of rachis, the first pair 0.7-1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.8 mm, the blades Unear-oblong from obtusangulate base, subacute at apex, straight or slightly arched forward, those near mid-rachis 5.5-10.5 x 1.2-1.8 mm, 4.2-5.5 times as long as wide, aU 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the slightly displaced midrib and the posterior nerve of almost equal strength, the latter produced almost to blade apex, the outer posterior one very short or obsolete.
Peduncles (1-) 1.5-3 cm; capitula without filaments 6-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse ff-buds cinereously antrorse-strigulose between four glabrous keels; bracts lance-ovate incurved 0.5-1 mm, prominently 1-nerved dorsally, minutely ciliolate, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, most bisexual; calyx mdimentary 0.1- 0.15 mm, the rim undulate or microscopically denticulate; coroUa narrowly claviform (2. l-)2.4- 3.1 mm, the erect, concave but not thickened, ovate lobes (0.6-)0.8-l x 0.5 mm; filaments pink, free above an obscure stemonozone, exserted 5- 7 mm; ovary glabrous.
Pods (described by Burkart) 15-25 X 5-6 mm, 2-4-articulate, the valves glabrous, the replum shortly thinly setulose.
In moist disturbed thickets and on stream banks, 500-950(-?) m, apparently common on the n. tributaries of rio Jacui between 50°30' and 53°W in n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, thence n. to lower Pelotas valley in s.-centr. Sta. Catarina.-Fl.
XII-IV. Burkart (1979, I.e.) has described this species under the name M. sparsa, which he seems to have known exclusively through the Field Museum photograph of the isotype at Berlin.
I have seen three surviving dupUcates of this, aU of which differ from M. sparsiformis in smaller simpler leaves and, in particular, in one-nerved leaffets girdled by a simple continuous pallid margin bereft of cilia.
As already known to Burkart, M. sparsiformis occurs in armed and unarmed states, which perhaps deserve some taxonomic recognition.
Although not known to occur sympatrically, the ranges of these forms are not significantly different overall.
Field observation is required.
364.
Mimosa atlantica Bameby, sp. nov., leguminis defectu affinitatis dubiae, fortasse autem M. gymnadi affinis, inter congeneres austrobrasilienses haplostemoneos conjugatopinnatos statura fmticosa forti, caule glabro aculeis intemodialibus 3-9 mm longis rectis armato, pinnis elongatis macrophyllidiis, infforescentia elongata pseudoracemosa efoliata, et patria riparia in regione inferiori atlantica insignis.—Petioli 3-5.5 cm; pinnae 8-11 cm usque longae, foliolis 12-20 x 3-5.5 mm usque appresse setoso-ciliolatis, utraque facie glabris; capitula ellipsoidea absque filamentis ±10-12 X 7-9 mm; calyx campanulatus 0.2- 0.25 mm longus glaber; filamenta inter se libera.—Brazil.
Parana: Mun.
Guaratuba, Pedra Branca de Araraquara, 30.
XII.1965 (ff), G. Hatschbach 7J566.—Holotypus, MBM 423; isotypi, NY, P, US. Armed shrubs of unrecorded height with stout terete glabrous, decumbent or assurgent, chocolate-brown ffowering stems armed between successive nodes, on ribs descending from the lanceligulate stipules, with a pair of stout broad-based, stramineous brown-tipped, almost straight aculei 3-9 mm, the lf-axes very sparingly strigose with appressed setae ±1 mm, the peduncles a little more densely and shortly strigulose and puberulent, the dry foliage dull brown sub-bicolored, the lfts a little paler beneath than above, glabrous facially, discontinuously setose-ciliate, the plumply ellipsoid, solitary or geminate capitula forming a conspicuously stipulate but efoliate pseudoraceme exserted 2-3 dm from foliage.
Stipules firm ascending, narrowly lanceolate 10-13 X 1.2-2 mm, glabrous facially, thinly or remotely setose-ciliate, coarsely 4-5-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 3-5.5 cm x 0.4-1 mm, the narrow ventral sulcus open at apex (spicule 0); pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 8-11 cm, the interfoliolar segments 3-5(-7) mm; lfts 18-21 -jug.,
the first pair 2-5 mm distant from unequal paraphyllidia (the larger of these exterior, falcately lanceolate 1.5-2.5 mm, 1 -nerved), the blades broadly linear from obtusangulate base, deltately acute, slightly curved forward, those near mid-rachis 12-20 x 3-5.5 mm, 4-4.4 times as long as wide, all 4-nerved from livid pulvinule, the simple midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2-2.5, the inner posterior nerve expiring well beyond mid-blade, the outer ones shorter, the venation not raised yet faintly perceptible on upper face, bluntly prominulous beneath, the appressed marginal setae ±0.1-0.2 mm diam., free through 0.5-0.8 mm.
Peduncles ±2-3 cm; capitula without filaments ±10-12 X 7-8 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds minutely pubemlent at tip between four prominent keels; bracts linear-oblanceolate 2.4-2.8 X 0.3 mm, glabrous except for a few minute setular cilia; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, in the one capitulum examined in detail all functionally staminate, the ovary present but the style apparently abortive, filiform and included in corolla; calyx membranous 0.2-0.25 mm, glabrous, the obscurely angulate-lobulate orifice bearing 1-3 minute setulae; corollas narrowly vase-shaped 3.3 mm, the membranous ovate 1-nerved, shallowly concave lobes ±0.8 x 0.7 mm; filaments lilac-pink, free to base, exserted ±8-10 mm; ovary glabrous.
Pod unknown.
On river bank at 150 m, known only from the Atlantic coast of Parana, Brazil in lat. 26°S (mun. Guaratuba).-H. XII-I(-?).
Mimosa atlantica seems morphologically closest to M. gymnas, but differs decisively in stout glabrous stems armed with straight intemodal prickles, in ample leaves, and in lowland Atlantic habitat.
365.
Mimosa monticola Dusen, Arq. Mus. Nac. Rio de Janeiro 13: 55.
1903.—Typus infra sub var. monticola indicatur.
Slender, freely branching, diffiise or scrambling microphyllous shrublets 6-10(-?) dm, randomly armed with sharply deffexed infrastipular and sometimes also intemodal aculei 0.5-2 mm, the young stems, lf-stks and peduncles strigose with retrorsely appressed, obliquely basifixed, tapering setae ±1-1.5 mm mixed or not with minute pubemlence, the axis of geminate pinnae antrorsely strigose, the firm plane olivaceous subconcolorous, when dry dull brown lfts wholly glabrous or on margin with few weak forwardly appressed cilia, the numerous small globose capitula solitary in the axil of distal lvs on peduncle well surpassing subtending lf-stk. Stipules erect herbaceous, lanceor narrowly ovate-acuminate 2.5-4.3 X 0.7-1.5 mm, striately 5-8-nerved, sometimes weakly ciliolate near base but otherwise glabrous, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including livid pulvinus (1-)2-15 x 0.2-0.3 mm, progressively shorter upward along branchlets; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 8-24(-26) mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.8 mm; lfts of larger lvs (8-) 10- 20-jug., abmptly decrescent proximally, less so distally, the first pair 0.4-1 mm distant from ovate acute or lanceolate, 1 -nerved paraphyllidia 0.4-1.1 mm, all in outline linearor narrowly eUiptic-oblong from shallowly semicordate or obtusangulate base, abmptly apiculate, those near mid-rachis 2.5-7 x 0.6-1.7 mm, 3.1-4.6 times as long as wide, all smooth veinless above, beneath finely 3-nerved from pulvinule, the straight midrib subcentric beyond mid-blade and weakly 1-2-branched on either side, the adjacent posterior nerve expiring well above mid-blade, the outer posterior one very short.
Peduncles subcapillary l-4(-5) cm; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear or lance-eUiptic 0.7-1.3 x 0.1-0.3 mm, glabrous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus glabrous; calyx subobsolete, at most 0.2 mm; coroUa submembranous 4-costate, narrowly turbinate or vase-shaped 1.5-2.2 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave lobes 0.6-0.85 x 0.45-0.6 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.15-0.25 mm below the glabrous ovary, exserted 3.5-5.2 mm.
Pods (of var. monticola, and these little known) few per capitulum, subsessile, in profile oblong-elUptic 10-13 x 3.5-4 mm, 2-3-seeded, the replum ±0.45 mm diam., contracted at apex into a cusp less than 1 mm, remotely strigulose with short antrorse setulae, the stiffly papery brown valves glabrous or almost so, coUiculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into freefalling biconvex indehiscent articles 3.5-5 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
Mimosa monticola is the most northerly-ranging member of ser. Sparsae and the only one of exclusively tropical-montane dispersal.
It resembles vicariant, extratropical M. gymnas in most technical characters, especially in recurved aculei, but is a more slender plant, retrostrigulose on stems as well as on peduncles, with striately nerved stipules and substantially smaller leaffets.
Two weakly differentiated varieties are discernible.
Key to varieties of M. monticola 1.
Lfts of longer pinnae (8-) 10-15-jug., those near mid-rachis 4.5-7 x 1.3-1.8 mm; extreme s.-w. Minas Gerais and immediately adj. Rio de Janeiro and S. Paulo 365a. var. monticola (p. 608).
1.
Lfts of longer pinnae 14-20-jug., those near midrachis 2.5-4 X 0.6-1 mm; s. Sa. do Espinhafo in s.-centr. Minas Gerais 365b. var. schwackeana (p. 608).
365a. Mimosa monticola Dusen var. monticola.
M. monticola Dusen, 1905, I.e., sens, str.—"In parte septentrionali territorii .
.
. e gr. prope valle Ayuoroca; in alt. c. 2200-2600 m. s. m.; mense Martio (sec. specimen Uleanum) fforens; mense Junio [1902] plantum fmctibus paucis fere maturis praeditam inveni."
—Holotypus, collected on n. slope of Mt. Itatiaia in s. Minas Gerais, Dusen s.n.,
S!; isotypi, G! = F Neg. 28224, BM! K!; presumed isotypi, numbered i)w5^A2 656, MG 7655! US! W!; paratypi, Ule 160, R! RB! 3322, HBG! M. delicatula Hoehne, Revista Mus. Paulista 10: 658.
1918, nom. illeg.—"N.
3452, Lofgren, S. Francisco dos Campos, 22/1/96."—Holotypus, SP (not seen); isotypus, G! = F Neg. 2522^.-Note: F Neg 1407 depicts Moura 433 from Campos de Jordao, S. Paulo (+B), correctly identified as M. monticola by Harms, but not isotypic—M. hoehneana Burkart, Darwiniana 9: 387.
1951; non M. delicatula Baillon, 1886.
M. multiplex sensu Glaziou, 1906: 179 (Fda. do Rio Preto, Rio de Janeiro, Glaziou 8653, A! G! NY! P!); non Bentham.
Leaf-stalks 3-15 mm; longer interfoliolar segments of pinna-rachis 0.9-1.8 mm; otherwise as in key to vars.
In habitats and at elevations little recorded, to be expected in montane thickets or on cool moist campo, on Mt. Itatiaia attaining 2600 m, local on both slopes of Sa da Mantiqueira between 44° and 45°W in n.-w. Rio de Janeiro, adj. Minas Gerais, and far n.e.
S. Paulo, BrazU.—Fl.
XI-III. 365b. Mimosa monticola Dusen var. schwackeana Bameby, var. nov., a var. monticola parum differt foliolis minoribus, magis numerosis et confertis, pinnamm longiomm 14-20 (nec 10-15)-jugis simulac 1.5-3 (nec 4.5-7) mm usque longis.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Rodrigo Silva [mun. Ouro Preto, 20°25'S, 43°30'W], au Capao, IV-V. 1892 (fl), A. Glaziou 19120.- Holotypus, K; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1435\ C! [presumably P, but not seen there].—M. schwackeana Taubert ex Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 184.
1906, nom. nud. Leaf-Stalks (1-)2-6 mm; longer interfoliolar segments of pinna-rachis 0.5-0.7 mm; otherwise as in key to vars.
In unknown habitat, but to be expected at elevations near or above 1000 m, known only from the type-locality in s. Sa. do Espinha90, s.-centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.
366.
Mimosa gymnas Bameby, sp. nov., M. monticolae ut videtur propiuscule affinis, ab ea caulibus petiolisque glabris, pedunculis solis interdum parcissime retrostrigosis, stipulis l-3(-4)-, nec 5-8-nerviis, foliolisque majoribus saepissime 7-17 (nec 2.5-7) mm usque longis diversa.—Brazil.
Parana: Mun.
Palmeira, Santa Rita, 26.
X.1982 (fl), G. Hatschbach -^5705.-Holotypus, MBM 77570; isotypus, NY.—Parana: Mun.
Ponta Grossa, Passo do Pupo, 11.
X.1967 (fl), G. Hatschbach 17438.-Varatypi, MBM 4035, MO, NY, P, US. M. monticola sensu Burkart, 1979: 196, quoad Reitz & Klein 17439 (NY! US!); non Dusen, 1905.
Stiffly diffuse, trailing or pendulous, distantly foliate subshrubs 5-9(-?) dm, glabrous except for rare minute setulae subtending some Ift-pulvinules and in some plants a few retrorse, basifixed setae on peduncles, unarmed except (in some plants only) for rare decurved intemodal aculei 0.5-1 mm, the subterete stems purplish-livid, branched distally, the plane, rather thick-textured lfts when dry brown-olivaceous subconcolorous, eciliate, the globose or plumply ovoid capitula solitary or rarely geminate either in primary If-axils only or partly on short branchlets lateral to primary stem.
Stipules erect or decurved, triangular or lanceolate 1.5-4.5 x 0.8- 1.8 mm, l-3(-4)-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 1-5 cm, at middle 0.25-0.55 mm diam.; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 18-55 mm, rounded dorsally, sharp-edged laterally, the interfoliolar segments 1.2-3 mm; lfts 10-18(-20)- jug., subdecrescent distally, the small first pair (1.2-) 1.5-3.3 mm distant from deffected subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-0.8 mm, the blades narrowly oblong-oblanceolate from obliquely obtusangulate base, obtuse at apex, those near and above mid-rachis (6-)7-15(-17) x (1.5-)1.8- 3.5(-^) mm, 3.3-4.2 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath slenderly 3-5-nerved from pulvinule, the simple or faintly branched midrib centric beyond mid-blade, the inner posterior nerve produced almost to blade apex, the outer ones very short.
Peduncles (1.5-)2.5-5 cm; capitula without filaments (4.5-)5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds bluntly 4-keeled; bracts oblanceolate or elliptic-oblanceolate 0.45-1 mm, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus glabrous; calyx campanulate 0.2-0.4 mm, the orifice undulately tmncate or obscurely lobulate; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2-2.7 mm, the cymbiform, apically thickened, dorsally carinate, intemally reddish lobes 0.7-1 x 0.4-0.6 mm; filaments bright lilac-pink, monadelphous through 0.4-1 mm, exserted 4-6 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods solitary or few per capitulum, in profile Unear-oblong contracted at base into a stipe ±1.5 mm, the body ±25 x 5 mm and 4-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum ±0.4 mm wide, the smooth glabrous valves low-colliculate over each seed, breaking up when ripe into free-falling articles 5-5.5 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In campo mpestre, about rock outcrops or pendulous from sandstone cliffs, or on rocky stream banks in climax rain-forest, ±700-1100 m, scattered along the w. slopes of Sas.
Paranapiacaba and do Mar in Parana (municipios Arapoti, Jaguariaiva, Ponta Grossa, Palmeira, Balsa Nova) and immediately adj. S. Paulo (Itarare), in lat. 24°-26°S, to be sought in adj. n.-e. Sta. Catarina.-FL.
X-II. Mimosa gymnas, so named for the hairless stems and leaffet margins, is akin to the more northem M. monticola, but a coarser plant, glabrous except for a few retrorse setae on peduncles alone, with longer leaf-stalks and larger leaffets (see key for measurements).
It differs from M. glabra, which is known at present only from Rio Grande do Sul, in weak or suppressed armament, leaves larger in all parts with leaffets of longer pinnae 10-18 (not 8-10)-jugate and not nervemarginate, and most decisively in the conventionally articulate fmit.
Mimosa sparsa is obviously different in leaf-stalks only 2-4 mm and pinnae less than 1 cm long. 367.
Mimosa sparsa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 385.
1841.-"Brazil, 5'^//a"-Holotypus, K!; isotypus, ^B = Sello d. 1191 in ¥ Neg. 7J76!; presumed isotypi, Sello s.n.,
MO! W!; probable isotypus, Gaudichaud, Hb. imper.
BresU 1440, P! M. sparsa sensu Bentham, 1875: 408; 1876: 346; Burkart, 1979: 193, ex parte (exclus. pi. catarin.).
Slender, stiffly widely branched microphyllidious shrub of unknown potential stature, erratically armed on some intemodes with 1-2 straight, widely ascending aculei 1-3.5 mm, the livid terete stems and concolorous lfts either minutely pubemlent or glabrate but the stems and peduncles randomly, very sparsely strigose with retrorsely appressed, subcalcarate but not basally obcompressed setae ±0.8-1.3 mm, the pinnarachises bearing an antrorse setula behind each pulvinule, the lfts narrowly continuously pallidmarginate but not setose-ciliolate, the globose capitula axillary, solitary or geminate, on peduncle much longer than subtending If.
Stipules erect-incurved, lance-subulate 2 ^ x 0.5-1 mm, 1-3-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-4.5 x 0.3 mm, subterete; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 6-14 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.4-0.8 mm; lfts 7-15-jug., strongly decrescent proximally, the first pair ±0.2-0.5 mm distant from erect subulate paraphyllidia ±0.3 mm, the blades linear-oblong from semicordate base, subacute, those near mid-rachis 3-4.5 x 0.6-0.8 mm, (4.3-)5-6.5 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath subcentrically 1 -nerved, the pallid marginal nerve ±0.1 mm wide, microscopically pubemlent.
Peduncles 2-3 cm; capitula without filaments 6-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the ff-buds gray-pubemlent; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1-1.3 mm, 1-nerved, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx obsolete; corolla subtubular ±3.3 mm, obtusely 4-angulate, antrorsely strigulose from base upward, the narrowly ovate cymbiform but scarcely thickened lobes 0.7-0.8 x 0.5 mm; filaments (presumably pink) free to base, exserted 6.5-7.5 mm; ovary setulose dorsally.
Pods ±2-9 per capitulum, ascending sessile, undulately linear in profile, up to 40-45 x 5 mm, 6-7(-8)-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.4 mm wide, thinly antrorse-setulose, the firmly papery valves breaking up when ripe into free-falling articles ± 6 mm long; seeds not seen.
Of uncertain habitat and dispersal, said by Malme (1931: 13) to have been coUected by SeUo probably in southem Rio Grande do Sul, to be sought here and in adj. Umguay; the record (Burkart, 1979: 193) from Sta. Catarina is based on material of the related M. sparsiformis.
368.
Mimosa glabra Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 386.
1941.-"BrazU, ^^//a"-Holotypus, Sello d. 7^50, collected (Malme, 1931:13) near Rio Pardo in Rio Grande do Sul, K (hb. Benth. & hb. Hook.,
mounted together)!; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1325, G! P (hb. Gaudichaud.
1432)\ M. glabra sensu Bentham, 1875:408, t. 66 (pod); 1876: 345.
Shrubs of unknown stature, except for 1-2 short ascending setae at insertion of each 1ft and (in few distal lvs) random minute setulae at margin of some lfts glabrous throughout, the stiff"virgate, chocolate-brown stems terete striate and armed with stout straight ascending stramineous aculei 4-8 mm, these (1-)2-3 per intemode on either infrastipular or infrapetiolar ribs but always well below the node itself, the dry foliage dull dark brown concolorous, the globose capitula solitary in upper If-axils, the fmits long-persistent on annotinous defoliate stems.
Stipules firm erect, lanceolate 2—4 X 0.7-1 mm, 3-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (5-)7-14 x 0.3-0.4 mm, shaUowly sulcate, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (6-) 12-20 mm, the interfoliolar segments 1.2- 2.5 mm; lfts 6-9(-10)-jug., the first and last pair smaller, the blades in outline oblong from obtusangulate base, obtuse or deltately acute, the larger ones 6-8.5 x 2-2.5 mm, all narrowly continuously marginate, dorsally 3-nerved, the simple midrib dividing blade ±1:2, the inner posterior nerve expiring just short of apex, the outer one much shorter.
Peduncles 13-30 mm; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the 4-ribbed obtuse ff-buds minutely pubemlent; bracts 1-1.5 x 0.4-0.6 mm, keeled dorsally, minutely pubemlent, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, all (?) bisexual; calyx campanulate ±0.2 mm, glabrous; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 3-3.3 mm, the ovate concave lobes 0.9 X 0.8-1 mm, a little thickened at apex, pubemlent near margins, the tube thinly pubemlent with minute retrorse hairs; filaments presumably pink, free to base, exserted 6-7 mm.
Pods mostly 1-2 per capitulum, sessile, when fully fertile narrowly oblong-eUipsoid turgid, only a little compressed laterally, 12-24 x 4-5 mm, 2-5-seeded, the replum ±2 mm wide, the leathery brown valves smooth veinless, tardily separating in one piece from replum, the cavity divided between seeds by hyaline septa; seeds basipetal, plumply obovoid-eUipsoid ± 4 x 2 mm, the testa dark brown smooth.
In unknown habitat but to be expected in campo thickets, recorded only from the type-locality near Rio Pardo, in the Jacui valley near 30°S in e.-centr. Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU.—Fl. season unknown.
The pod of M. glabra resembles, on a small scale, that of several members of sect. Habbasia ser. Pachycarpae, but is smooth and glabrous.
So far as known all other Sparsae bear conventional craspedia, and valvately dehiscent fmits are known from extratropical Brazil only in sect. Batocaulon ser. Stipellares and sect. Calothamnos.
Mimosa glabra is consequently isolated in the genus and here associated with ser. Sparsae on the basis of vegetative and fforal resemblances.
368bis.
Mimosa prionopus Bameby, sp. nov., M. pseudocallosae Burkart forsan (sed haud arete) affinis, cum ea stipulis et paraphyllidiis crassiusculis et dilatatis, fforibus glabris, filamentisque inter se basi connatis congma, sed statura subtriplo majori, caulibus tetragonis, petiolis dorsiventraliter complanatis utraque margine crebre retrosetosis, calycisque paleacei lobulis fimbriato-decompositis longe distans.—Brazil.
Parana: Campo graminoso da encosta de morro, 1200 m, Sa.
Capivari Grande, mun. Campina Grande do Sul, 13.
III. 1990 (ff), /.
Cordeiro (with /.
M. Silva) 716. -Holotypus, MBM 133310; isotypus, NY.
Subshrub with decumbent, nearly simple, distally quadrangular, sparsely but coarsely foliate, almost simple stems ±3(-"15") dm and thinly strigose with reffexed terete tapering setae up to 1-2 mm, the stout, dorsiventrally compressed lfstks and bifacial peduncles densely retro-ciliate, the stiff lustrous, oUvaceous or subpruinose, plane lfts callous-marginate and antrorsely setose-ciliate, the dense globose capitula of glabrous ffs arising from distal If-axils.
Stipules appressed, obtusely deltate 2-2.5 x 2.5-3 mm, thick-textured, fuscous, obscurely 5-nerved, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks including discolored pulvinus ±2.5-5 cm, in dorsoventral view 1.2-1.5 mm wide, facially smooth but bisulcate lengthwise, the straight retrorse cilia of margin severalseriate and some basally conffuent, all obliquely basifixed, distally lutescent, the terminal appendage beyond the one pair of pinnae resembling a stipule in form, texture and fuscous color; pinna-rachises 4.5-7.5 cm, their pulvinus antrorsely setulose, the longer interfoliolar segments 3-3.5 mm, glabrous except for one small antrorse seta behind each Ift-pulvinule; lfts 15- 19-jug., decrescent toward each end of rachis, the first pair arising ±1.5-2.5 mm distant from a pair of ovate paraphyllidia ±1-1.3 mm that resemble stipules in form, texture and fuscous color, the blades narrowly oblong or lance-oblong from shallowly semicordate base, abmptly acuminulate, those near mid-rachis 12-17 x 3.5- 5 mm, ±3.5 times as long as wide, all 3-4-nerved from pulvinule, the strong midrib forwardly displaced at base of blade becoming subcentric distally, the inner posterior primary nerve narrowly ascending to or a little beyond mid-blade, the outer ones progressively shorter, the midrib giving rise, on anterior side at and beyond middle, to 3-5 widely ascending secondary venules faintly brochidodrome immediately within the pallid corneous margin.
Peduncles solitary 3-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments 8-9 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the densely crowded fls subglutinously varnished, duU pink-purple; bracts linear-oblanceolate ±1.7 x 0.3 mm;y7ow^r5 sessile, 4-merous 4-androus; calyx paleaceous pallid, narrowly campanulate 1.6 x 1.2 mm, the 4 lobes fimbriately decompound at apex; corolla turbinate-campanulate 1.7 x 1.2 mm, the ascending cymbiform lobes 1.3 x 0.7 mm; filaments ±6.5 mm, pink, united at base through almost 1 mm; fertile ovary and style not seen.
Pod unknown.
In montane campo at 1200 m, known only from the type-locality, near 25°20'S in the coast range of e. Parana, Brazil.-Fl.
III-IV(-?).
Mimosa prionopus is distinguished by this strong syndrome of characters: bluntly four-angled stems thinly retrostrigose with basifixed (basally ecalcarate) setae; incrassate stipules and paraphyllidia; broad, dorsiventrally compressed petioles densely retrociliate along each margin; pallid-marginate and antrorsely setose leaffets of thick texture (recalling those of M. dolens subsp. rigida); glabrous ffowers; and paleaceous calyx.
In the stipules and paraphyllidia it resembles M. pseudocallosa, but this is a smaller, more slender plant with terete stems and a simply lobed membranous calyx.
The petiole of M. pseudocallosa is somewhat lateraUy dilated distally, but lacks the dense fringe of stiffly deffexed, pluriseriate setae which has suggested the epithet prionopus (Gr. prion, saw + pous, foot or foot-stalk).
The paleaceous calyx with dissected lobes is unique in subser. Sparsae, most of which, furthermore, have stems either armed, or terete, or both.
The collector described the stems as reaching 1.5 meters in length, but they are scarcely 3 dm in the type-specimen.
369.
Mimosa pseudocallosa Burkart in Reitz, Fl. ilustr. catarin.
LEGU(l): 215 + map, est. 34.
1979.—"Santa Catarina: Campo Alegre, Morro do Iquererim, beira de ragato, no campo, 1200 [m], .
.
.
Reitz & Klein 6443 (05 02 1958)."—Holotypus, SI (not seen); isotypus, US 22688351 = NY Neg. 12180.
Unarmed, functionally herbaceous subshrub from woody, adventitiously rooting branched caudex, the simple livid, bluntly ribbed, diffuse and incurved-ascending stems 3-5 dm, at anthesis defoliate proximally, distantly leafy distaUy, the whole plant appearing glabrous but the leaf-pulvini and dorsal face of pinna-rachises strigose with scattered subappressed setae and the corneous margin of plane subcoriaceous lfts appressed-setose-ciliolate, the globose capitula 1-3 in distal If-axils on peduncle a little longer or shorter than subtending lf-stk. Stipules oblong-eUiptic obtuse 2.5-6(-7) x 1-2.5 mm, coarsely (4-)5-6-nerved dorsaUy, glabrous or residually setose-ciliolate, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 2-4.5 cm, proximally subterete but dorsiventrally compressed and to 0.7 mm wide distally, the terminal appendage subulate minute, spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the backwardly arched rachis 3-6 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-2 mm; lfts of most pinnae 20-32-jug. (in some small early lvs fewer, no further described), the first pair ±1.5-2 mm distant from suborbicular, coarsely 3-5-nerved paraphyllidia 0.7-1.4 mm diam., the blades narrowly lanceoblong from broadly obtusangulate base, obtuse apiculate, the larger ones 6-10(-l 1.5) x 1.8-2.8(- 3) mm, all essentially nerveless above, beneath 3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib slightly arched forward and displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the inner posterior nerve expiring near midblade, the outer posterior one much shorter, the marginal cUia free for 0.15-0.4 mm.
Peduncles 20-27 mm; capitula without filaments 6-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the prominently 4-angulate ff-buds glabrous; bracts Unearlanceolate ±1 mm, 1-nerved; y/ovv^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx membranous 0.6-0.9 mm, the tube ±0.4 mm, the unequal subulate teeth 0.2-0.55 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.7-2.8 mm, the ovate membranous, shallow-hooded but scarcely callous, strongly 1-nervedlobes ± 1 x 0.6-0.7 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.7-0.9 mm, exserted 5-6.5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous; pod unknown.
On stream-banks in high campo, near 1300 m, known only from Morro do Iquererim in mun. Campo Alegre, far n.-e. Sta. Catarina, Brazil; to be sought in adj. Parana.—Fl.
II-III. Mimosa pseudocallosa is strongly differentiated by lack of prickles, extremely reduced indumentum, and dilated venulose paraphyllidia.
Burkart associated it with members of subser. Reptantes of this revision, from which it differs technically by (inter alia) glabrous, not retrostrigulose corollas.
In habit it recalls the ecologically comparable M. difl^usa, but is of coarser growth, and differs in stipules, in foliose paraphyllidia, and deeply campanulate calyx.
The epithet pseudocallosa draws attention to an odd similarity in foliage to some members of subser. Dolentes, but these are very different in form of infforescence.
At first I placed M. pseudocallosa only provisionally and with misgiving in subser. Sparsae, noting that its systematic position would need reassessment when the fmit became known, but the discovery in 1990 of M. prionopus has provided a plausible connection to subser. Sparsae.
Its low stature and simply toothed, not paleaceous and fimbriate calyx separate it decisively, however, from M. prionopus.
E(ii.l5).
Series MIMOSA subseries OBSTRIGOSAE (Bentham) Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Obstrigosae (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Obstrigosae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 384.
1841, majori ex parte (spp. 90-95), duobus ultimis (spp. 96, 97) exclusis.—Sp. lectotypica: M. adpressa Hooker & Amott.
M. ser. Obstrigosae sensu Bentham, 1875:408 et 1876: 345, iisdem exceptis.
Microphyllidious shrubs and subshrubs with stiff or wiry stems, armed or not, the aculei either 1-3 per intemode and displaced from node or (M. ramboi) solitary and immediately infrapetiolar, all either straight horizontal or gently acroscopic; inflorescence of usually numerous, solitary (geminate) globose capitula; indumentum of stems and peduncles composed of retrorsely appressed, basally dilated, dorsally compressed and minutely calcarate setae mixed or not with minute pubemlence, the setae in M. ramboi yellowish and concentrated close below nodes and capitula and the stems otherwise densely retropilosulous; stipules (1-)2-7-nerved; lf-stks 0-3 (-9) mm, espiculate; lfts of longer pinnae (5-)6- 50-jug., the lfts continuously marginate and usually setose-ciliolate, the largest 1-7 mm; calyx shallow-campanulate tmncate or minutely lobulate, sometimes vestigial; filaments free or almost so; pods 2-12 (rarely more) per capitulum, sessile, (1-)2-5(-6, in M. sprengelii to 8)-seeded, the replum mostly 0.4-0.8 (in M. sprengelii 1- 1.4) mm wide, the dehiscence craspedial.
Spp. 9, primarily of the lower Parana-Umguai basin in n.-w. Argentina and adj. Paraguay, Brazil and Umguay, one extending s. in Argentina to s. prov. Buenos Aires, one tropical-montane in Minas Gerais and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
The subseries Obstrigosae is here limited to those tme mimosas that bear on their stems and peduncles characteristic cuneiform or scalelike, retrorsely appressed setae coincident with continuously marginate leaflets.
The nucleus of the subseries consists of the five species with subsessile leaves described by Bentham in Flora brasiliensis (1876: 266, key).
To these Burkart added M. ourobrancoensis, a tropical-montane analogue of warm-temperate M. rupestris, M. obstrigosa, and the far-southern M. tandilensis, all essentially very similar; and the peculiar M. ramboi, remarkable for solitary, immediately infrapetiolar aculei, for yellowish retrorse setae concentrated near stem-nodes and under the capitula, and for a relatively dense dusty-gray indumentum of loose reffexed hairs.
Mimosa glabra and M. sparsa, classed by Bentham with these typical Obstrigosae, are here referred to the new subser. Sparsae, in which the retrorse setae, when present, are terete and basifixed, and coincide with discontinuously marginate leaffets.
Mimosa glabra was from the first anomalous in ser. Obstrigosae for want of retrorse setae that constituted the signature of the series itself, and was extraordinary in that context for its turgid, valvately dehiscent fmit girdled by a broad replum reminiscent, on a small scale, of diplostemonous ser. Pachycarpae.
Mimosa sparsa has retrosetose peduncles, but the setae are terete and basifixed, and the close affinity of the species appears to lie with M. sparsiformis, M. monticola, and M. atlantica, a group with which Bentham was unacquainted.
In the event M. sparsa is retained in subser. Obstrigosae, this subseries cannot be detached by any formal criterion from subser. Sparsae.
While M. ramboi and M. sprengelii are clearly marked and relatively isolated taxa, the remaining Obstrigosae are intimately related and in need of critical scrutiny, especially in the field.
The characters of mature stature, leaffet-number, development of prickles, and length of peduncles that have been found serviceable in combination to distinguish between species are all individually unstable.
Revisionary study will probably reduce the number (or at least in some cases the rank) of those recognized herein.
Conspectus of subser. Obstrigosae Mimosa * Stem-internodes and peduncles evenly retrostrigose throughout, the strigae sometimes mixed with minute pubemlence; stems armed or not, but aculei, when present, downwardly displaced from stem-nodes, either 1-2 infrastipular or in addition a third infrapetiolar; fruit a strigose craspedium; if peduncles no longer than diameter of capitulum then lfts of longer pinnae over 15-jug. 370. ourobrancoensis Burkart 371. rupestris Bentham 372. parvipinna Bentham 373. obstrigosa Burkart 374. ramulosa Bentham 375. tandilensis Spegazzini 376. adpressa Hooker & Amott ** Indumentum and armament of *, but pod-valves coarsely hispid and separating from replum in one piece; peduncles no longer than diameter of capitulum and lfts of longer pinnae 6-11 pairs.
377. sprengelii DeCandolle *** Stem retrostrigose only below each node and peduncles only below the capitulum, otherwise densely retropilosulous overall; aculei solitary and immediately infrapetiolar; fruit a strigose craspedium.
378. ramboi Burkart 1.
Key to species of subser. Obstrigosae Stems armed with strong, horizontal or widely ascending aculei.
2.
Stems uniformly retrostrigose throughout, the setae sometimes mixed with minute puberulence; aculei intemodal, either infrastipular only or both infrastipular and infrapetiolar together; lf-stks 0.5-3 mm.
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 16-40-jug. 4.
Peduncles 6-24 mm.
5.
Shrubs attaining 2.5 m, repeatedly stiffly branched distally, the stems aculeate on nearly all intemodes; Paraguai valley in s.-w. Misiones and adj. Corrientes, Argentina 373.
M. obstrigosa (p. 617).
5.
Difflise-assurgent subshrubs less than 1 m, the stems simple or few-branched, rarely and randomly aculeate; Uruguay and adj. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil; aculeate state of: 371.
M rupestris (p. 615).
4.
Peduncles less than 3 mm, commonly subobsolete; Uruguai valley in e. Corrientes, Argentina and s. to the Plata estuary both in Argentina and in Uruguay 376.
M. adpressa (p. 619).
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 6-15(-l 7)-jug. 6.
Erect shrubs attaining 1-2 m; far s. Brazil and Uruguay.
7.
Peduncles 6-12 mm; valves of pod appressed-strigose, articulate when ripe; Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil and Uruguay 374.
M. ramulosa (p. 618).
7.
Peduncles (0-) 1-5 mm; valves of pod coarsely hispid with stout, either erect or proximally erect and distally porrect-attenuate setae, when ripe separating in one piece from replum; Uruguay only 377.
M. sprengelii (p. 620).
6.
Humifuse shrublets less than 1 m; s. prov. Buenos Aires, Argentina, and reported from s. Uruguay 375.
M. tandilensis (p. 618).
2.
Stems retrostrigulose only at and near nodes and densely pallidly retropilosulous overall; aculei solitary, immediately infrapetiolar only; lf-stks 1.5-9 mm; s.-w. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil 378.
M. ramboi (p. 621).
Stems unarmed.
8.
Lfts of longer pinnae 12-40-jug., either 2- or 3-nerved; peduncles (4-)5-24 mm; corolla-lobes puberulent extemally; extratropical, in Argentina (Misiones), adj. Paraguay, Brazil (Rio Grande do Sul), and Uruguay.
9.
Rachis of longer pinnae (10-)16—40 mm; capitula without filaments 5.5-6.5 mm diam.; s. Rio Grande do Sul and Uruguay 371.
M. rupestris (p. 615).
9.
Rachis of longer pinnae 7-16 mm; capitula without filaments ±4-5 mm diam.; lower Parana and Uruguai basins, from s. Paraguay to w. Rio Grande do Sul in Brazil, and Uruguay; e Rio Grande do Sul 372.
M. parvipinna (p. 616).
8.
Lfts of longer pinnae 35-50-jug., 1-nerved; peduncles 20-40 mm; corolla-lobes glabrous extemally; tropical montane, in s.-e. Brazil (centr. and s. Minas Gerais and adj. Rio de Janeiro) 370.
M. ourobrancoensis (p. 614).
370.
Mimosa ourobrancoensis Burkart, Darwiniana 7(4): 533, fig. 7.
1947.-"BrasU.
Estado de Minas Geraes: Ouro Branco, leg. P. Campos Porto 502, XII-1916 .
.
. [RB] 7<S55."-Holotypus, Campos Porto 1228, 26.11.1922 (ff), RB! M. rupestris sensu Bentham, 1876: 346, ex parte, quoad pi. Qaussen. ex Itatiaia, forsan etiam quoad pi. Sellov. (stipulis latioribus parum diversam); Glaziou, 1906: 180, non Bentham, sens, str., 1841.
Stiffly erect unarmed microphyllidious shrubs with solitary or few, defoliate livid tmnks ± 3-4 m m diam. paniculately few-branched distally, the strictly ascending, densely leafy homotinous branchlets together with peduncles concealed by retrorsely appressed, dorsally compressed, stramineous setae minutely spurred at base, the pinna-rachises strigose with similar but short and antrorsely subappressed setae, the subsessile lvs incurved to erect, the firm narrow imbricate lfts glabrous facially, subconcolorous, continuously callous-marginate and ascending-setulose-ciliolate, the inflorescence of few globose capitula pedunculate in upper If-axils and not or scarcely exserted from foliage.
Stipules stiffly erect, narrowly lanceolate 2-5 x 0.5-1.1 mm, dorsally glabrous, 1-3, perhaps sometimes 4-7-nerved, pectinately setose-cUiolate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks reduced or almost so to retro-setose hard pulvinus 0.8-2 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the incurved rachis commonly 2.5-5.5 (ex char. -7) cm, the interfoUolar segments 0.4-0.9 mm; lfts (30-)35- 50-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.3-0.9 mm distant from subulate 1-nerved paraphyllidia 0.4-1 mm, the blades linear or linear-lanceolate from semicordate base, acute mucronulate, those near midrachis 3-5 (ex char. -7.5) x 0.6-1 (-"1.5") mm, 4.5-6.6 times as long as wide, the corneous pallid margin ±0.1 mm wide, its ciliar setulae free for 0.3-0.5 mm, all blades nerveless above, beneath coarsely prominently 1 -nerved, the simple pallid midrib centric beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles (1.5-)2-4 cm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the receptacle setose, the oblong 4-sulcate fl-buds glabrous but papillate under magnification; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1-1.8 X 0.15-0.25 mm, strongly 1-nerved, distally incurved and setose-ciliolate, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, many lower ones staminate; calyx a minute glabrous or microscopically ciliolate cup or collar 0.2- 0.25 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.2-2.7 mm, the thick-textured oblong cymbiform lobes 1.1-1.2 X 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments presumably pink, free to base, exserted 4.5-5 mm.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, sessile, Unear-oblong in profile, cuneate at both ends, 18-22 x 4-5 mm, 3-4- seeded, the shallowly constricted replum ±0.8 mm wide, strigulose with obese subappressed setulae less than 1 mm, the papery valves almost concealed by longer ascending tapering setae to 2-2.5 mm, breaking up when ripe into free-falling, tardily dehiscent biconvex articles 4.5-6 mm long; seeds (few seen) plumply ellipsoid ±3.5 x 2 mm, the testa dull black.
In unrecorded microhabitats, to be expected on rock-ledges or in campo mpestre at 1000 m upward, known only from mountains about Ouro Branco in s.-centr. Minas Gerais and on Sa. de Itatiaia in w. Rio de Janeiro, to be sought elsewhere along the crest of Sa. da Mantiqueira.—** H. X-III. Mimosa ourobrancoensis was collected in early days on Mt. Itatiaia by Claussen, perhaps also in unknown localities by Sello, and again near Ouro Branco in 1884 and 1888 by Glaziou, but the specimens were referred by Bentham (Claussen 39, K! = NY Neg. 1842, plant at left, and perhaps also Sello s.n.,
at right) and by Glaziou (1906, I.e.) to M. rupestris, a smaller plant of extratropical dispersal that differs in fewer pairs of 2-3 (not l)-nerved leaflets and pubemlent flowers.
Burkart did not mention M. rupestris in the protologue of M. ourobrancoensis, merely remarking that it differed from all other Obstrigosae in habit alone.
Within its range of dispersal M. ourobrancoensis is readily recognized by its spindling growth-habit consisting of long slender leafless tmnk surmounted by a few stiffly ascending microphyllous new branches, by the dense thatch of retrorse, basally spurred, scalelike setae that covers the young stems and peduncles, and by the single pair of relatively long and narrow, multifoliolate pinnae.
An unnumbered Sello collection at K (divided between hb. Benth. and hb. Hook.), distributed from Berlin as M. rupestris but not so annotated by Bentham, differs slightly from typical M. ourobrancoensis in narrow one-nerved stipules, but has the glabrous flowers and narrow bracts, with the many one-nerved leaflets, of the species, and is provisionally referred here.
Its provenance, like that of so many Sello collections, is unknown.
371.
Mimosa rupestris Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 385.
1841.-"BrazU, Sello; ['on high Rocky'] Mountains of Rio Jaquhy [Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil], Tweedie."
—Lectotypus, Tweedie s.n.,
preferred over Sello s.n. because from a known locality, which must have suggested the epithet, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 12312; presumed syntypus, Sello 5211, +B = F Neg. 1368 (+ fragm)! M. subinermis Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 385.
1841.-"BrazU, 5'^//a"-Presumed holotypus, K(hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 12313.-Reduced by Bentham, 1875: 408 to M. rupestris.
M. rupestris sensu Bentham, 1875: 346, ex parte, exclus. pi. Claussen. e mont. Itatiaia, quae = M. ourobrancoensis.
Slender microphyllidious subshrubs from woody base, unarmed or randomly remotely armed at some nodes with 1 infrastipular straight aculeus to ±2 mm, the simple or distally fewbranched, diffuse or assurgent stems (1-)2-6(8- ?) dm, these together with very short petioles and peduncles densely strigose with retrorsely appressed, dorsally ffattened, basally dilated and spurred setae to 1-1.5 mm, the pinna-rachises likewise but forwardly strigose, the brown-olivaceous firm-textured, ventrally concave lfts glabrous facially, narrowly continuously pallidmarginate, serrately ciliolate at least below midblade, the small globose capitula solitary in a succession of If-axils toward apex of homotinous stems.
Stipules erect lanceolate 2-5 x 0.6-1.4 mm, glabrous and coarsely 3-6-nerved dorsally, eciliate or almost so, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including hard pulvinus 1-2.5 X 0.4-0.5 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (10-) 16-40 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.8 mm; lfts of longer pinnae ±20-40-jug., decrescent proximally, the blades linearor narrowly lance-eUiptic from auriculate base, either obtuse or apiculate, the larger ones 2-5.5 x 0.5-1.5 mm, 3.3-5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the simple pallid midrib excentric proximally but subcentric distally, the inner (or only) posterior nerve expiring near or well beyond mid-blade, the outer one shorter.
Peduncles 12-24 mm; capitula without filaments 5.5-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the 4-sulcate ff-buds minutely gray-pubemlent; bracts lance-ovate ±1-1.5 mm, coarsely 1-nerved dorsally, the margin sometimes minutely ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, many proximal ones (in few capitula examined) staminate; calyx a shallow subscarious, minutely ciliolate cup 0.2-0.5 mm; coroUa turbinate-campanulate 2.3-3.1 mm, the cymbiform, scarcely thickened, dorsally carinate lobes 0.8-1.2 x 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments presumably pink, free to base, exserted ±3-4 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, setulose following fertilization.
Pods (little known) to 3- 10 per capitulum, sessile, undulately Unear-oblong straight, in profile ±20-25 x 5 mm, 3-4 (-?)-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.5- 0.7 mm wide, the valves low-colliculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike strigose with forwardly ascending or subappressed setae, the valves breaking up when ripe into free-falling articles 4.5-5.5 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In habitats little recorded, to be sought on open rocky hUlsides and in dry stony campo, known precisely only from s. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil and from adj. Umguay (Rivera-Frontera); a specimen labelled "S. Paulo" (Gaudichaud 844, P) may have been collected by Sello much further south.-FL.
XII-? Herbarium specimens of M. rupestris and M. ourobrancoensis are readily confused, the dense retrorse cauline indumentum and the small imbricate leaffets being much alike, and the differences in stature and habit not evident.
In Flora brasiliensis Bentham cited the early collections of M. ourobrancoensis as M. rupestris, but the morphological differences in habit, in venation of the leaffets, and in pubescence of the corolla, strengthened by widely allopatric ranges of dispersal, adequately distinguish them.
The type of M. subinermis, which Bentham himself eventuaUy treated as a taxonomically negUgible armed variant of M. rupestris, is the only specimen of its sort known to me.
Except for its very few aculei, inserted on one infrastipular rib immediately below random nodes, it appears identical with genuine M. rupestris.
Nothing exact is known of its origin or dispersal, and its status remains contingent on rediscovery.
372.
Mimosa parvipinna Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 384.
1841.-"BrazU, Sello.''- Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K!—Specimens of M parvipinna are preserved under 3 numbers, none surely duplicates of Bentham's, but all authentic for the sp.: Sello 3625, collected (Malme, 1931: 13) at Alegrete, Rio Grande do Sul, +B = F Neg. 1352\ Sello s.n.,
MO! NY! W! Sello d.l 153 in hb. Gaudichaud.,
P! perhaps = Sello d.l 113, W! M. parvipinna sensu Bentham, 1875: 408; 1876: 346; Burkart, 1948: 130, fig. 19P + antecedent bibliography.
Either diffuse or ascending, unarmed microphyUous shrublets 3-9 dm, the proximaUy spurred and distally branched stems together with peduncles densely strigose with retrorsely appressed, dorsoventrally compressed, basally spurred setae to ±1-1.5 mm, the lf-axes antrorsely strigose with similar but shorter setulae, the tiny, strongly or weakly callous-marginate lfts either glabrous or facially pubemlent, minutely setulose-ciliolate, the globose capitula pseudoracemose along terminal branchlets, each subtended by a diminished If.
Stipules firm erect, linear-triangular 1-3.5 x 0.4-0.7 mm, 3-4- nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks reduced to small pulvinus, the lvs therefore sessUe against the stem, the primary cauline ones longer than those of axillary brachyblasts; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis in primary lvs 7-16 (ace.
Burkart to 24) mm, in fasciculate ones 4-10 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.2-0.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 12-30 (-38)-jug., the small first pair close to minute subulate paraphyUidia, the blades narrowly lanceeUiptic from minutely auriculate base, acute, those near mid-rachis 1-3 x 0.3-0.8 mm, 3.3-4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, 2-nerved beneath, the simple midrib moderately displaced, the posterior nerve produced to or beyond midblade.
Peduncles (4-)5-9(-12) mm; capitula without filaments ±4-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds gray-pubemlent; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1-1.3 mm, pubemlent dorsally, eciliate;flowers4-merous 4-androus, all or most bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.15-0.3 mm, glabrous extemally, the angulate rim minutely ciliolate; corolla narrowly vase-shaped, strongly 4-ribbed, ±1.9 mm, the ovate concave lobes 0.5-0.6 x 0.45 mm, a little thickened at very tip, extemally gray-pubemlent on either side ofprominent midrib; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 3-3.5 mm.
Pods few per capitulum, sessile, in profile linear-compressed 6-18 x 4-4.5 mm (1-)2-4(-5)-seeded, the almost straight replum scarcely 0.5 mm wide, subappressed-setose, the valves either similarly strigose or more densely hispid with erect-incurved tapering setae, when ripe breaking up into free-falling articles ± 3 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In savanna, sometimes on red soils, below 350 m, scattered through the lower Parana and Umguai valleys in Misiones, Argentina and w. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, somewhat isolated at ± 200 m in e. Rio Grande do Sul (Porto Alegre); reported by Burkart (1948, I.e.) from extreme n. Uruguay and from depto. Caaguazu (T. Rojas 5144, not seen) in s. Paraguay.—Fl. primarily IV-VII, intermittently thereafter.
Unarmed stems and diminutive leaves and capitula render M. parvipinna unmistakable among the Obstrigosae.
373.
Mimosa obstrigosa Burkart, Darwiniana 7: 231, fig. 4, lam. 1.
1946.-"Argentina.
Misiones: .
.
.
Santa Ana, Rodriguez 520 [fl] .
.
.
Apostoles, Burkart 14291 [fr] "—Syntypi, SI (not seen); isosyntypus, Burkart 14291, GH! RB! M. obstrigosa sensu Burkart, 1948: 133.
Intricately freely branched shrubs attaining 2.5 m, the stiff brown homotinous stems randomly armed with stout subhorizontal or widely ascending aculei 2-6(-7) mm and together with peduncles strigose with retrorsely appressed, basally spurred paleaceous setae to 1-2.5 mm, the back of lf-stks similarly but antrorsely strigose and minutely pubemlent, the imbricate lfts glabrous on both faces or finely pubemlent beneath, slenderly pallid-marginate and finely setuloseciliolate, the numerous globose capitula solitary pedunculate in a series of If-axils along all new branchlets.
Stipules firm erect, triangular or lanceacuminate 2-5 X 0.6-1 mm, prominently 3-5- nerved, glabrous or less often pubemlent externally, tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks including pulvinus 1-2.5 mm, spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 12-35 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.2-0.9 mm; lfts (16-) 18-28 (t. Burkart to 36)-jug., the first pair less than 0.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyUidia to 0.3 mm, the blades linear from obtusangulate or shallowly auriculate base, apiculate at tip, straight or subfalcate, those near mid-rachis 3.5-6 x 0.65-1.1 mm; ±5-6 times as long as wide, all 2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the simple midrib displaced to divide blade ± 1:2-3, the inner (or only) posterior nerve expiring well beyond mid-blade, the outer one, when present, very short or mdimentary.
Peduncles 7-19(-23) mm; capitula without filaments 5-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds gray-pubemlent; bracts linear, distally attenuate and incurved, 1-2 mm, 1 -nerved, pilosulous dorsally, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx campanulate ±0.4 mm glabrous, at base contracted into a pedicel ±0.1 mm, the rim minutely asymmetrically denticulate; corolla subtubular slightly widened distally, 2.6-3.1 mm, the membranous, shallowly concave, faintly 1-nerved lobes 0.7-1 x 0.6 mm; filaments pink, obscurely united at very base, exserted 4.5-5.5 mm.
Pods 2-5 per capitulum, sessile, in profile linear-oblong, straight or slightly decurved, (8-)ll-22 X 3.5-5.5 mm, (2-)3-6-seeded, the straight or shallowly constricted replum ±0.4 mm wide, the valves low-convex over seeds, the replum and valves alike densely strigose with forwardly appressed, basally dilated pallid setae to 1-1.5 mm, when ripe breaking up into individually indehiscent articles 2.3-4 mm long; seeds obliquely basipetal, in broad profile obovate ± 3- 3.5 X 2-2.5 mm, the smooth testa fuscous brown or black.
In wet campo and at thicket margins, below 200 m, locally plentiful in the lower Parana valley in s.-w. Misiones (deptos.
Sta. Ana, S. Ignacio, Posadas) and adj. Corrientes (Loreto), Argentina, to be expected across the river in s. Paraguay.—Fl.
VI-IX, occasionally later.—JE^5- pinillo.
374.
Mimosa ramulosa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 385.
1841.-"BrazU, Sello."
, the data expanded by Bentham, 1875: 409 to: "BrazU, southem provinces and adjoining parts of the Argentine Republic", and further, in Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 347.
1876 to: " 'in Brasilia meridionali': Sello; ibidem vel in regionibus finitimis: Tweedie."
—Lectotypus, Sello s.n.,
fmct. immat.,
closely matching and probably part of Sello 2984 from (Malme, 1931:13) Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, K (hb. Benth.)!; isotypi, -^B = F Neg. 1363\ K (hb. Yioo\i.)\-Sello 2144, flor., from S. Francisco de Paula, Rio Grande do Sul (Malme, I.e.), possibly = Sello s.n. in hb. Hook. (K!) is perhaps syntypic; Tweedie's material did not contribute to the protologue.
M. ramulosa sensu Burkart, 1946, lam. 2 opp. p. 239; 1948: 224; Lombardo, 1964: 61, fig. 46.
M. ciliata sensu Glaziou, 1906: 180 (19133, but doubtless not from Sa. dos Orgaos, the duplicate at K! labelled, also erroneously, "Minas"); non K. Sprengel.
Repeatedly, stiffly, often flexuously branched microphyllous shrubs attaining 2(-?) m, erratically armed on intemodes, especially of terminal flowering branches, with distantly displaced infrapetiolar, widely ascending or horizontal, straight broad-based aculei 2-6 mm, the stems and peduncles densely strigose with retrorsely appressed, basally calcarate and obcompressed setae to 0.65-1.5 mm, the small subsessile olivaceous lvs either shorter or a little longer than intemodes, the firm concolorous, callous-marginate, imbricate lfts facially glabrous or only microscopically pubemlent, commonly minutely setulose-ciliolate, the smaU and numerous globose capitula solitary or rarely geminate in a long succession of If-axils, elevated on a peduncle ± as long as or surpassing the associated If.
Stipules firm erect, narrowly triangular or lanceolate 1.5- 3 X 0.55-1 mm, 2-5-nerved dorsally, glabrous or almost so, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including (or consisting of) pulvinus 0.5-1.5(-2.5) mm; spicule 0; pinnae 1 -jug.,
the antrorsely strigose rachis 2.5-13 mm, the longer interfoUolar segments 0.3- 0.6 mm; lfts 6-15(-17)-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.1-0.2 mm distant from minute subulate or conic paraphyllidia, the blades lance-elUptic obtuse or subapiculate, those near mid-rachis (1.3-)2-4 x 0.4-0.9 mm, ±2.4- 4.4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 2-nerved from pulvinule, the simple midrib excentric proximally but subcentric distally, the posterior nerve weaker, expiring near or short of mid-blade.
Peduncles 6-12 mm; capitula without filaments 3-4 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtusely 4-angulate flbuds minutely pubemlent; bracts ovate-cymbiform acute 0.4-0.7 x 0.25-0.5 mm, 1-nerved, dorsally pubemlent, persistent;y/ow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, many lower ones staminate; calyx a subtmncate membranous collar 0.1-0.15 mm; corolla turbinate 1.5-1.9 mm, the ovate, weakly 1-nerved lobes 0.6-0.9 x 0.5-0.7 mm; filaments pink or lilac, free to base, exserted 1-1.7 mm.
Pods not seen fully mature, when young linear in profile, densely subappressed-setose.
In stony campo and at edge of thickets at low elevations, apparently confined to the Atlantic slope in e. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil and adj. Umguay.-Fl.
IV-VI(-?).
In stature, armature and leaflet-number M. ramulosa closely resembles M. sprengelii, but it has longer peduncles, shorter stamens, and appressed-strigose fmits probably articulate when ripe, not hispidly setose, burlike and valvately dehiscent.
Its small pedunculate capitula are almost those of M. parvipinna, but it is a taller shmb with prickly branchlets and fewer leaflets (in larger pinnae 6-15(-17), not 12-30 pairs).
The paucity of collections presently available precludes a firm taxonomic opinion of this group of species.
375.
Mimosa tandilensis Spegazzini, Contr. fl. Tandil 13.
1901. —"[Argentina.
Buenos Aires:].
.
. bastante comun en todos los cerros [del Tandil]."—Syntypi, Spegazzini 663, 664, LPS = Burkart, 1948, lam. XIV! M. tandilensis sensu Burkart, 1948: 134 + antecedent bibliography, fig. 19T; 1967: 445, fig. 138F-I. Commonly diffuse or prostrate but not adventitiously rooting, microphyllous shrublets scarcely 1 m, randomly armed on intemodes with straight, broad-based aculei to 4.5 mm and the stems and peduncles at once retrostrigose with coarse, minutely calcarate setae to ±1-1.5 and minutely pubemlent, the dorsal face of pinnarachises forwardly strigose, the globose capitula solitary and few geminate in distal If-axUs.
Stipules narrowly triangular ±2 mm, 3-5-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks not over 2 mm, reduced to pulvinus or almost so; pinnae 1 -jug.,
the rachis 4-14 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-0.8 mm; lfts (7-)9-l6-jug., decrescent proximally, the small first pair close to minute subulate paraphyllidia, the blades narrowly eUiptic-oblong subacute, those near mid-rachis ±3-4.5 x 0.7- 1 mm, all dorsally 2-nerved from pulvinule, glabrous faciaUy, continuously paUid-marginate and setose-ciliolate.
Peduncles 3-10(-"20") mm; capitula without filaments ±4.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the bracts linear-oblanceolate 1-nerved, shorter than the pubemlent ^-huds;flowers4-merous 4-androus; calyx membranous campanulate ±0.15 mm, obscurely lobulate; corolla ±2 mm, the ovate-triangular subacute 1-nerved lobes 0.7-0.8 mm; filaments pale pink, free to base, exserted ±2 mm.
Pods 1-6 per capitulum, sessile, in profile linear 6-20 x 3.5-4 mm, (1-)2-4(-"6")-seeded, the slender replum shallowly undulate, the papery valves lowcolliculate over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles ±3 mm long; seeds "3-3.5" mm (not seen).
In rock-crevices and on stony hillsides, 250- 1000(?) m, reportedly common on Sas. del Tandil and less so on Sas. de Cummalal and de la Ventana in lat. ±37°-38°30'S in s. Buenos Aires, Argentina, and reported by Burkart (1948: 136) from Pta.
Ballena near Maldonado in s. Umguay.-R. IX-XI, III-IV. This account of Af. tandilensis is based largely on the careful and comprehensive studies of Burkart, cited above.
I remain sceptical, however, as to whether M. tandilensis is specifically distinct from the certainly very closely related M. ramulosa, of which Burkart had no distinct knowledge.
The latter is described as an erect, stiffly and flexuously branched shmb attaining two meters in height, whereas M. tandilensis normally has humifuse or diffusely trailing stems less than one meter long (exceptionally erect when sheltered).
In leaf-formula, leaffet-venation, ffower, and fmit the two species are essentially identical.
The nature of the relationship can be determined by field-study.
376.
Mimosa adpressa Hooker & Amott, Bot. Misc.
3: 202.
1833.-"Umguay, Baird.
Entre Rios [Argentina], Tweedie."
—Syntypi, Baird s.n.,
Tweedie s.n.,
K!; isosyntypus, Tweedie s.n.,
E! M. denhardtii L. H. Bailey, Stand, cycl. hort.
4: 2054.
1916.—Named from plants cultivated in Califomia, of unknown provenance.—No typus found at BH in 1985.—Cultivated as M. denhardtii, K! M. adpressa sensu Bentham, 1875: 409, t. 66 (fr); Burkart, 1948: 128, fig. 19, lam. 13; Lombardo, 1964: 58,fig.39; Burkart, 1987: 500,fig.223.
M. appressa (var. orthogr.) sensu Bentham, 1876: 347, t. 86.
Stiff microphyllous shrubs 4-15 dm with terete ffexuous, repeatedly branched stems randomly armed on intemodes with 1-2 infrastipular and sometimes 1 infrapetiolar aculei, these straight, widely ascending 3-7(-12) mm, the stems thinly or densely strigose with retrorsely appressed, dorsally compressed, basally calcarate setae to 1-1.7 mm, the pinna-rachises and fmits forwardly strigulose, the plant otherwise glabrous or vestigially scaberulous (eglandular), the crowded subconcolorous, dull olivaceous lfts finely continuously callous-marginate, the small globose capitula all solitary and sessile or subsessile in the axils of a series of coeval lvs.
Stipules firm erect, lance-attenuate or ovate-triangular 1.5-7.5 X 0.7-1.5 mm, glabrous beyond immediate base, pallidly 5-7-nerved, dry and fragile in age.
Leaf-stalks reduced to pulvinus or almost so, less than 3 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 14-32 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.4-1 mm; lfts opposite along rachis, those of longer pinnae (15-)16-32-jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.5- 1 mm distant from subappressed, subulate or papilUform paraphyllidia 0.1-0.5 mm, the blades linear from obtusely auriculate or subrectangular base, either obtuse-mucronulate or acute, those near mid-rachis (2.7-)3-6.5 x 0.6-12 mm, the smooth corneous marginal nerve ±0.05 mm wide, all blades shallowly concave and nerveless above, beneath pallidly 2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the strong simple midrib only slightly excentric, the simple (inner or only) posterior nerve produced well beyond mid-blade, the outer one, when present, short and faint.
Peduncles obsolete or rarely attaining 2.5 mm; capitula without filaments 4.5-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse ff-buds glabrous or minutely scabemlous; bracts ovate or lanceolate acute 0.4-1 mm, 1-nerved, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate 0.1- 0.25 mm, the rim obliquely tmncate or denticulate, glabrous; corolla subtubular or narrowly vase-shaped 2.5-3.2 mm, obtusely 4-angulate, the erect ovate concave lobes 0.5-0.8 mm, scarcely thickened; filaments pink, free, exserted 3-5 mm.
Pods usually several per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately linear 13-28 x 4-5.5 mm, 2-5(-6)-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.4-0.5 mm diam., the stiffly papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, like the replum strigose with strictly appressed, basally dilated, pallid-stramineous setae to ± 1 mm, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling, tardily dehiscent articles 3.5-7(-9) mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
Forming prickly thickets in open places along and near riverand stream-banks, scattered along rio Umguay and immediate affluents, in Argentina s.-ward from 27°S in Corrientes and Entre Rios, thence e. into adj. Umguay and to be expected in adj. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, thence along the shore of rio de la Plata as far as Maldonado.—Fl. profusely X-II, sporadically through the year.—Rama negra.
The exemplary descriptions, figures and commentary on M. adpressa given by Burkart (1948, 1987, U.cc.) are definitive.
The identity of M. denhardtii could not be confirmed from isotypic material, but seems certain from Bailey's description and from the fact that M. adpressa has been long known in cultivation in Califomia.
377.
Mimosa sprengelii DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 430.
1825, a substitute for M. ciliata K. Sprengel, Syst. veg. 2:205.1825, nom. W^eg.—''Monte Video [Umguay], SeUo."
—Neotypus, Sello s.n.,
manu Benthamii annotatus, K (hb. Benth.)! = NYNeg.
12311.-^onM. ciliata Wiltd.,
1809.
M. sprengelii sensu Bentham, 1841: 385; Malme, 1931: 11; Lombardo, 1964: 61,fig.47.
M. ciliata sensu Bentham, 1875: 409; 1876: 347; Glaziou, 1906: 180, ex parte (19133), caetera (19134. quae = M. ramulosa) exclusa.
Erect, intricately stiffly branched microphyllous shrubs attaining 2 m, armed on most internodes with l(-3) straight, erect or subacroscopic, broad-based lustrous aculei 1.5-5 mm, the stems and short peduncles minutely pubemlent and coarsely retrostrigose with appressed tapering, basally spurred setae ±0.6-1.5 mm, the lf-axes similarly but antrorsely strigulose, the small imbricate, facially glabrous lfts finely continuously callous-marginate and usually remotely minutely setose-ciliolate, the globose capitula solitary in If-axils on short or obsolete peduncle, only in praefloration shortly pseudoracemose.
Stipules firm erect, triangular or lanceolate 1.2-2.5 x 0.4- 0.8 mm, pallidly 3-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including small livid pulvinus 0.7-2 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 1.5-10(-11) mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.2-1.1 mm; lfts 6-11- jug., decrescent proximally and less so distally, the small first pair ±0.2 mm distant from minute paraphylUdia, the blades narrowly obliquely ovate or lanceor linear-elliptic from shallowly semicordate base, obtuse or deltately subacute, those at mid-rachis 1-6 x 0.5-1.5 mm, 2.5-4.2 times as long as wide, all ventrally concave veinless, dorsally 2-nerved from pulvinule, the pallid midrib displaced to divide blade 1:1.5-2.5, the posterior nerve expiring well beyond midrib; terminal lfts often falcately retro-arcuate.
Peduncles 1.5-5 mm, sometimes at early anthesis imperceptible; capitula without filaments 3-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds microscopically papillose-puberulent; bracts lance-acuminate or oblanceolate 0.6-1.5 mm, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx a minute glabrous collar 0.15 mm or less; corolla narrowly funnelform 1.5-2.2 mm, the cymbiform, obtusely carinate lobes 0.6-0.8 x 0.4-0.7 mm; filaments pink or lilac, free to base, exserted 2-4 mm.
Pods several per capitulum, sessile, burlike, in profile narrowly oblong-elUptic straight 14-24 X 4.5-6 mm, to 8-seeded, the straight replum 1-1.4 mm wide, the stiffly papery valves convex, the cavity intermpted between seeds by narrow filamentous septa, the replum and valves alike densely hispid with stout erect broad-based glabrous setae 2-3 mm, the ripe valves separating entire from replum; seeds (few seen) plumply lentiform ± 4 x 3 x 2 mm, the testa duU dark brown.
On open stony hillsides, at elevations not recorded, known only from Umguay.
Records from tropical southeastem Brazil (Glaziou, 1906, I.e., discussed below) are based on faulty data.—Fl.
VI, XI-I(-?), the fuU cycle not known.
At anthesis M. sprengelii resembles M. ramulosa in most respects, but differs in the subsessUe or very shortly pedunculate capitula.
Care must be taken to distinguish tme peduncles from occasional axillary branchlets which may lose their leaves at the fmiting stage and simulate elongate peduncles.
The fmit of M. sprengelii appears different from that of all other Obstrigosae in valvate dehiscence and coarse hispid indumentum of the pod-valves.
The type of Kurt Sprengel's Mimosa ciliata has not been located, and was perhaps lost at Berlin, where much of his herbarium was housed.
A Sello specimen emphatically annotated by Bentham (in his own herbarium at Kew) is proposed as neotype in the nomenclatural paragraph above.
This plant agrees well with the protologue, except that it has slightly more numerous leaflets, but it cannot be known for certain whether it is in fact an isotype or part of a second collection of the species.
Two specimens were cited and distributed by Glaziou as M. ciliata: his 19134, vaguely indicated as from the state of S. Paulo, Brazil, which is misidentified M. ramulosa (q.v.), and his 19133, which is correctly identified but was supposedly collected on Alto Macahe in Serra dos Orgaos in Rio de Janeiro.
Wurdack (Taxon 19: 911.
1970) has demonstrated that two Melastomataceae labelled by Glaziou as coming from Alto Macahe were in fact collected elsewhere by Puiggari and De Moura, and has raised suspicions of deliberate fraud on Glaziou's part.
A strange detail of Glaziou 19133 (P!) is that the specimen is accompanied by a typical field-label in Glaziou's hand, dated 8 August 1888, and a ticket bearing the same number 19133 is attached to the plant.
Thus all data seem coherent and authentic.
Two alternative explanations are possible: a) there really is (or was) a disjunct population of M. sprengelii, otherwise collected only in Umguay, or of a cryptically similar relative, on the summit ridge of Alto Macahe; or b) the record was deliberately falsified.
The probability that a local Uruguayan species occurs disjunctly on the Organ Mountains is low, but the tmth of the matter can only be ascertained by careful fieldwork.
The idea that Glaziou obtained the specimens from a correspondent and manufactured a false statement of provenance seems preposterous, but Glaziou's field-note of fleurs jaunes, which would be an anomaly in ser. Obstrigosae, also requires explanation or confirmation.
For the present it seems best to consider M. sprengelii endemic to Umguay.
378.
Mimosa ramboi Burkart, Darwiniana 7:227, fig. 3.
1946.-"Herb.
Rambo 26144 in Herb. Darwinion, e Brasilia australi, Rio Grande do Sul, leg. Rambo 1.1945 .
.
. circa 100 m a silva marginali fluminis Quarai-mirim, in vertice format© ab hoc flumine et ejusque tributario Sanga de Nhandubay... ."—Holotypus, SI, not seen; isotypus, RB!; topotypus, hb. Rambo 32812, leg. A. Pereira Giudice, NY (det.
Burkart)! Densely stiffly branched microphyllous shrublets attaining 5 dm, armed on the infrapetiolar rib ofalmost all intemodes with a solitary, straight or slightly upcurved, subhorizontal or widely ascending, laterally compressed, proximally pubemlent but distally glabrate stramineous aculeus to 5-12 mm, the flexuous stems, lvs and inflorescence densely gray-pilosulous overall with fine hairs less than 0.25 mm (the stems retrorsely so), the intemodes at base of and immediately below the stipules and the peduncles, especially beyond middle, in addition retrostrigose with straight stramineous, basally dilated and dorsally depressed, obscurely calcarate setae 1-2.5 mm, the crowded concolorous lfts pubemlent on both faces, continuously callous-marginate and setose-ciliolate, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary in the axil of coeval lvs; brachyblasts 0.
Stipules erect, lanceolate ±4-9(-10) x 1 mm, hispid-ciliate below middle, coarsely 3-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 1.5-9 mm, thinly retrostrigulose dorsally; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis including stiff appendage 5-14 mm, antrorsely strigulose dorsally, the interfoliolar segments less than 1 mm; lfts (5-)6-9-jug., decrescent proximally, the first pair close to lancesubulate paraphyllidia 0.6-1 mm, the blades ovateor lance-elUptic from shallowly semicordate base, mucronulate at apex, the largest ±4- 7 X 1.3-2.4 mm, 2.8-3.1 times as long as wide, their pallid margin forwardly setose-ciliolate, the blades nerveless above, beneath 1-2-nerved from pulvinule, the coarse palUd midrib only slightly excentric, the posterior nerve weaker, expiring near or below mid-blade.
Peduncles attaining 25 mm, mostly shorter; capitula without either exserted bracts or filaments ±5.5-6.5 mm diam.; bracts linear-attenuate 3.5^ x 0.2-0.3 mm.
1 -nerved, dorsally gray-pubemlent esetose, surpassing the obtuse 4-angulate gray-pubemlent flbuds; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, gray-puberulent overall; calyx a vestigial ring of minute setulae; corolla narrowly clavate in profile, ±3 mm, 4-ribbed, the erect ovate concave, somewhat thickened and purplish lobes ±0.8 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted ±5 mm.
Pods 1-2 per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong ±10-20 X 4.5 mm, the slender replum undulately constricted, the valves lowconvex over 3-4 seeds, the replum and valves alike pubemlent and antrorsely strigulose, the valves when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles ± 5 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In dry stony campo, sometimes forming diminutive thickets, ±250-300 m, known only from the valley of rio Quarai near 30°20'S, 56°30'W, in s.-e. Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU.- H. XII-I(-?).
E(ii.l6) Series MIMOSA subseries PUDICAE (Bentham) Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Pudicae (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Pudicae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 367.
1841, ex parte (spp. 30-32, 34), caeteris exclusis. —Sp. typica: M. pudica Linnaeus.—M. sect. Eu-mimosa subdivisio Pudicae DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 426.
1825, ex parte (spp. 12-14,16), caeteris exclusis.
M. III. Pudicae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 144, 146.
1928, nom. in clave, ex parte (M. aflUni exclusa).
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Meticulosae ***Subseriaceae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 379.
1841, ex parte, exclus spp. 73-75.—Sp. typica: M. subsericea Bentham = M. xanthocentra var. subsericea (Bentham) Bameby.—M. sect. Eumimosa *** Vulgares Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 405.
1875.
M. V. Polydactylae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. ¥1.23(3): 145-146.
1928, nom. in clave.—Sp. unica: M. polydactyla Humboldt & Bonpland ex WiUdenow.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Pudicae et Meticulosae sensu Bentham, 1876, passim, ex parte, iisdem ac in monographia sua anni 1875 exceptis.
Herbs, subshrubs, and weakly fmtescent sarmentose shrubs, either armed or not, the cauline aculei, when present, infrastipular and infranodal, either at or displaced below the node, and rarely a few scattered aculei on some lf-stks; indumentum of forwardly appressed, spreading, or loosely subretrorse setae and minute pubemlence, each variable in density; stipules either 1- 13-nerved, or firm-textured and externally nerveless; lf-stks 0.3-11 cm, espiculate; pinnae 1-5-jug., when more than one pair bome either beyond mid-lf-stk or subpalmately approximate towards its tip; lfts 11-105-jug., less than 15 mm, 1-5-nerved; inflorescence of globose or ovoidellipsoid capitula either all axillary at anthesis or some pseudoracemose and later subtended by a hysteranthous If; calyx either pappiform, or minute, or vestigial; corolla-lobes glabrous or antrorsely pubemlent; filaments free or weakly monadelphous below ovary; fruit a marginaUy hispid, 2-4(-5)-seeded craspedium 3-5 mm wide.
Spp. 6, widespread over much of tropical S. America, one extending n. to Lesser Antilles and one to s. Mexico and Greater Antilles, one endemic to the Brazilian Planalto and two to the upper Orinoco basin; one (M. xanthocentra) pluriracial, elaborately diversified in extra-Amazonian Brazil s.-ward to S. Paulo, in Paraguay, e. Bolivia and n.-e. Argentina, extending disjunctly n. in savanna habitats to Colombia and Venezuela; one (M. pudica) extensively naturalized in tropical Africa, Asia, Indonesia, and Oceania, and commonly cultivated.
The subser. Pudicae, as here defined, borrows elements from the three Benthamian series Pudicae, Pectinatae, and Meticulosae (subgroup "Vulgares"), and is enriched by two new species of local dispersal, M. guaviarensis and M. huberi.
Bentham sorted the species known to him primarily by number of pinnae and presence or absence of aculei.
This classification is unsatisfactory because a) M. pudica, the typical species of pluripinnate ser. Pudicae, has forms with conjugate pinnae; b) M. xanthocentra (of ser. Pectinatae) and M. verecunda (of ser. Pudicae) each appear in armed and unarmed guises; and c) the manifest relationship between M. xanthocentra and M. verecunda, expressed in habit, leafletvenation, and pappiform calyx, is concealed.
Two major circles of affinity can be discerned in subser. Pudicae of this account.
Mimosa pudica and M. polydactyla are almost always armed, only exceptionally have conjugate pinnae, and always have 2-5-nerved leaflets and a minute calyx.
By contrast M. xanthocentra and M. verecunda, as often armed as not and with plurijugate ^991] BARNEBY: SENSITIVAE CENSITAE (M7M05'^) 623 pinnae exceptional, differ collectively in oneFollowing realignment of old species and innerved leaflets and pappiform calyx.
The concorporation of new ones subser. Pudicae is subtrast between the leaflet-calyx syndrome is stantially different in definition and content from weakened by the discovery of M. huberi, which ser. Pudicae Bentham.
While enlarged in one diresembles M. pudica in leaflet-venulation but M. rection, it is diminished by transfer to subser. xanthocentra in calyx.
Mimosa guaviarensis Hirsutae of M. digitata, M. ruftpila, and M. nerpresents a similar but differently assorted synvosa (taxonomically equivalent of M. hirsutisdrome for here several-nerved leaflets coincide sima) on account of their basally monadelphous with a vestigial calyx.
The reticulate pattem of androecium. character-dispersal among these species discourages further division of the subseries.
Conspectus of subser. Pudicae Mimosa * Lf-stks (10-)20-55 mm; pinnae palmately 2-5-jug., in M. pudica sometimes 1-jug.; stems armed at and below nodes, in M. pudica exceptionally unarmed; lfts 2-5-nerved; calyx minute.
379. pudica Linnaeus var. pudica (known only from the holotype) a. var. unijuga (Walpers & Duchassaing) Grisebach b. var. tetrandra (Willdenow) DeCandolle c. var. pastoris Bameby d. var. hispida Brenan 380. polydactyla Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow ** Lf-stks 10-40 mm; pinnae palmately 2^-jug.; stems unarmed; lfts 4-5-nerved; calyx pappiform; s.-w. Venezuela.
381. /zM^J^r/Bameby *** Lf-stks 4-6 mm; pinnae 1-2-jug.; stems armed at or below nodes; lfts 4-5-nerved; calyx vestigial; e. Colombia.
382. guaviarensis Bameby **** Lf-stks 3-110 mm; pinnae 1-5-jug., when more than one pair bome beyond middle of lf-stk but not palmately approximate; stems either armed or not; lfts 1-nerved; calyx paleaceous-pappiform.
383. verecunda Bentham 384. xanthocentra Martius I. subsp. xanthocentra a. var. xanthocentra h. var. mansii (Martius) Bameby II. subsp. subsericea (Bentham) Bameby a. var. longepetiolata (Malme) Bameby b. var. subsericea c. var. exilis Bameby d. var. miseranda Bameby III. subsp. tremula (Bentham) Bameby a. var. tremula b. var. tenuis (Bentham) Bameby Key to species of subser. Pudicae 1.
Lfts 2-5-nerved; pinnae when more than one pair subpalmately crowded at tip of lf-stk. 2.
Lf-stks 1-7 cm.
3.
Calyx minute or vestigial; widespread in tropical N. and S. America, naturalized widely in paleotropics.
4.
Stipules 5-13-nerved; pinnae 1-3-jug. and lfts 11-35-jug 379.
M. pudica (p. 624).
4.
Stipules 1-nerved; pinnae 3-5-jug. and lfts of longer pinnae ±30-50-jug 380.
M. polydactyla (p. 630).
3.
Calyx pappiform; pinnae 2^-jug.; stipules firm, dorsally evenose; on laja outcrops along upper Orinoco in s.-w. Venezuela 381.
M huberi (p. 632).
2.
Lf-stks 4-6 mm; pinnae 1-2-jug.; stipules firm, dorsally evenose; llanos of e. Colombia 382.
M. guaviarensis (p. 633).
Lfts 1 -nerved; pinnae when more than one pair bome on distal half of lf-stk. 5.
Pinnae 2-5-jug.; centr. BrazUian PlanaUo 383.
M. verecunda (p. 634).
5.
Pinnae exactly conjugate; a polymorphic aggregate widespread over S. America from Colombia to n. Argentina, extremely diverse on the Brazilian Planalto and e. Paraguay, rare and scattered in Amazonia and n.-ward 384.
M. xanthocentra (p. 635).
379.
Mimosa pudica Linnaeus, Sp. pi. 518.
11 S2>. —^'Habitat in Brasilia."
Lectotypus (Brenan, Kew Bull. 1955(2): 185.
1955), a sterile specimen in hb. Cliffort.,
BM!,
this not identifiable below the level of species and hence constituting of itself the var. pudica.
Weakly fmtescent, usually diffiise or scrambling but sometimes independently erect-assurgent subshrubs precociously flowering as prostrate or ascending herbs, potentially attaining 12 dm but commonly less, with rare exceptions (var. pastoris) armed at or shortly below all nodes with a pair of broad-based, straight or declined, stramineous brown-tipped aculei (1-)l.5-5(-6.5) mm and sometimes further with intemodal or exceptionally with a few petiolar aculei, the simple or widely few-branched stems, lf-stks and peduncles varying from glabrous or almost so to thinly strigose or thinly to densely hirsute with erectspreading or -declined, fine tapering sordid setae to 1-3.5 mm, the foliage dull olivaceous subconcolorous, the thin-textured lfts commonly glabrous on both faces, sometimes all or only a few proximal ones of each pinna thinly strigose dorsally, rarely all minutely pubemlent dorsally, all ciliate with slender, forwardly appressed or narrowly ascending setae not produced backward into a continuous margin, the ellipsoid capitula sometimes solitary in early If-axils but verticellate by 2-7 in most distal ones, sometimes in early anthesis forming a shortly exserted pseudoraceme but this hysteranthously foUate, the fmits lateral.
Stipules firm, lanceolate or Unearattenuate (3-)4-10(-l 1) X (0.7-)l-2.4 mm, striately (5-)7-1 l(-13)-nerved from base, either glabrous or setose distally, setoseor setuloseciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (1-)2-5(-5.5) cm, the petiole proper not more than 3 mm shorter, at middle (0.4-)0.5-0.9 mm diam., openly grooved ventraUy, the one (exceptionally 2) interpinnal segment, if present, 0.5-2.3 mm; pinnae commonly of all lvs 2-jug., or of some upper lvs 1-jug., rarely 1-jug. in all lvs and exceptionally in random lvs 3-jug., the distal pair scarcely or decidedly longer than the proximal, the rachis of longer pinnae of primary lvs 3-6.5(-8) cm, of lvs along some distal branchlets (1-) 1.5-3 cm, the interfoliolar segments l-2.5(-3) mm; lfts of distal (or only) pair of pinnae 1 l-27(-36)-jug., decrescent only at each end of rachis, the first pair (0.3-)0.7-1.8 mm distant from lanceolate, often unequal, 1-nerved paraphyllidia (0.3-)0.5- 2(-2.3) mm, all in outline Unear-oblong from obtusangulate base, straight or rarely subfalcate, abmptly acute-apiculate, those near mid-rachis (4-)5-13(-14) X (1-)1.2-2.3(-2.5) mm, ±4-6 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath slenderly (4-)5-nerved from pulvinule, the distally subcentric midrib remotely 3-5-branched on each side, the single anterior and inner posterior nerves filiform, shortly intramarginal and produced well beyond mid-blade, the outer posterior one(s) much shorter.
Peduncles (0.7-)l-3 (-3.5) cm; capitula without filaments or bracteal setae 3.5-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis either moriform or conelike and cancellately hispid, the linear receptacle ±5-10 mm; bracts linear or linear-oblanceolate, abmptly incurved above or below middle, often accrescent upward along the rceptacle, those near mid-capitulum 1-2.5 x 0.2- 0.5 mm, all dorsally glabrous 1-nerved, the margin either glabrous or beyond middle ciliate on each side with 1-3 or rarely several fine ascending setae 0.1-1.4 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some or many lower ones staminate; calyx a membranous campanulate cup 0.1-0.2 mm, the rim either subtmncate or minutely, often asymmetrically denticulate, one or more teeth sometimes tipped by a short setula; corolla narrowly vase-shaped or subtubular, or some bisexual ones at times narrowly turbinate, the bisexual ones 1.5-2.1 mm, the membranous, whitish or pink-purple, weakly 1-carinate, shallowly concave, ovate lobes 0.45-0.7 x 0.4-0.5 mm, extemally either glabrous or pubemlent; filaments pink sometimes fading whitish, at base very slender and either free or weakly monadelphous through 0.2 mm or less, exserted 3.5-6 mm; ovary minutely stipitate, at anthesis glabrous, commonly 4-ovulate.
Pods several or to ±30 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile undulately narrow-oblong 8-15 X (2.7-)3.5-4.5(-5)mm,(2-)4- seeded, the constricted replum 0.25-0.45 mm wide, contracted at apex into a cusp 0.5-2.5 mm, hispid on dorsal and lateral ribs with stramineous, often brown-tipped tapering setae to 2-4 (-5) mm, the smooth greenish-brown or dark brown papery valves usually glabrous, sometimes densely pilosulous, when ripe breaking up into free-falling biconvex indehiscent articles (2-)2.5-3.5(-4) mm long; seeds plumply lentiform 2.4-3.3 X 2.1-2.8 mm, the duU fawn-brown or fuscous-castaneous testa microscopically granular.—5'^/15/^/v^ (French possessions or former colonies); dormidera, cierrateputa (cierra tus puertas), sensitiva, dormilona, vergonzosa, ten vergUenza (Spanish Latin America); pinahuihuixtle, quecupatli (Mexico); mori vivi (Hispaniola); honte (Haiti); dormideira (Brazil).
Mimosa pudica, the mimosa best known, although not exceptional, for its shrinking response to shock or touch, is closely related to M. polydactyla.
From this it differs most obviously in simpler leaf-formula, but also (cf. key to subser. Pudicae) in broader stipules and longer filaments.
In some respects it is a variable species, but the task of disentangling the intraspecific taxonomy is lightened by the worldwide revision by Brenan (1955, condensed in 1959: 46), who proposed a lectotype and recognized within the species three varieties distinguished by characters here assembled in key form: a. Corollas glabrous; floral bracts 0.7-1.1 mm, shorter than submature buds and marginally either glabrous or minutely setulose; stipules 4-7 (-8) mm; stems either glabrous or hispid var. unijuga. a. Corollas pubemlous distally; other features variable. b. Roral bracts 1-1.5 mm, either glabrous or ciUate, but marginal setulae not over 0.75 mm; stipules of var. unijuga; stems more often hispid than glabrous var. tetrandra. b. Floral bracts 1.8-2.2 mm, ciliate, the marginal setae 1-1.5 mm; stipules 8-14 mm; stems always hispid. var. hispida.
It will be noted that var. pudica could not be keyed because the identity of the sterile specimen in the Linnaean herbarium cannot be positively identified.
The var. pudica is therefore restricted to this one specimen.
When applied to material of M. piuiica from Africa, Asia, Malesia and Micronesia, Brenan's key conditions are neatly met in almost all cases.
Although widespread and locaUy very populous, the races of M. pudica encountered in the paleotropics appear relatively simple genetically, being descended probably from a finite number of introductions from the Americas in post-Columbian times, and they are essentially uniform over extensive areas.
Thus all Philippine M. pudica that I have seen is pronounced var. hispida, all Hawaiian material pronounced var. unijuga.
It is otherwise in tropical America, where I have found many instances of independent variation in length of stipule, length of floral bracts, and length of bracteal cilia that make strict application of Brenan's criteria difficult.
As in many Leguminosae, stipules and bracts tend to vary together, so that the relatively long stipules and bracts attributed to var. hispida may be viewed as two aspects of one basic difference.
Similarly, setose pubescence of stems and of bracts is generally, though not invariably, linked.
A glabrous corolla, which characterizes var. unijuga, is occasionally associated with the long stipules, and occasionally with the long bracteal setae, of var. hispida.
Brenan tentatively suggested that var. unijuga and var. hispida, which are substantially different overall, could be distinct but interfertile species which have given rise by introgression to a polymorphic derivative var. tetrandra.
An objection to this hypothesis is that var. hispida, which bulks large among paleotropical populations of M. pudica, is, as Brenan was quick to observe, inexplicably rare and scattered in the Americas, where it lacks a focus of abundance in undisturbed habitats that could be identified as an aboriginal homeland.
Because M. pudica sensu lato is assumed to be of American origin, like all near kindred, it should be possible to learn something of its racial history by close observation of its dispersal in the New World, however modified by man this may be.
To this end I divided 180 gatherings of Af. pudica on loan or on permanent deposit at NY into Brenan's three varietal categories and, ignoring a few specimens of controversial identity, plotted each on a separate map.
From these maps it appeared that the foci of abundance for vars. unijuga and tetrandra, although overlapping, are substantially different.
The dense continuous range of var. unijuga is primarily circum-Caribbean, extending from Jamaica east through the Greater and Lesser Antilles to Trinidad, thence west through northem Venezuela and northem Colombia to Panama, north along the Atlantic coast of Central America to Belize, and west to the southem bend of the Gulf of Mexico between Tabasco and Veracmz.
Outside this very natural range var. unijuga occurs, or has occurred, sporadically as follows: on North Bimini in the Bahamas; in urban waste places and around seaports in El Salvador, Pacific Ecuador, and the Guianas; in the Amazon valley at Manaus and Belem only; along the upper rio Madeira in Rondonia, Brazil; and as a roadside weed in coastal and interior southem Bahia, where it was first found by Martius in the year 1818.
Native status of var. unijuga within and south of Amazonia seems hardly credible.
The primary range of var. tetrandra, as determined from morphologically unambiguous specimens in which short stipules, bracts, and bracteal cilia coincide with pubemlent flowers, is concentrated in central Colombia, from the Pacific coast to the Magdalena valley, and around the southem borders of the Guayana Highland in Venezuela and neighboring Brazil, in which range it is the only form of M. pudica known to occur.
It is common also on the Caribbean slope in Venezuela eastward to Trinidad, Tobago, and the southernmost Antilles, where it is sympatric with var. unijuga, but not with var. hispida.
Outside these areas of concentration var. tetrandra has been collected in urban Veracmz, Mexico, in urban central Costa Rica (where all three varieties converge), rarely in Cuba, and in Brazil at Manaus, around the bay of San Salvador in Bahia, and southward at scattered points along the coast in Espirito Santo, Rio de Janeiro (with Guanabara), and S. Paulo.
It is improbably native anywhere outside of northem South America.
The var. hispida, as already noted, is relatively uncommon in the Americas, and indisputable native status cannot be inferred from its presently known dispersal.
It is the most often cultivated form of M. pudica, but has not by this means achieved any secondary dispersal in America comparable to that gained in the Old World tropics.
I have the following records: in Antillea, from New Providence in the Bahamas, from suburbs of La Habana and elsewhere in Cuba, from Jamaica and from St. Croix; in Central America one each from capital cities of El Salvador and Costa Rica; in South America one each from Trinidad and Surinam, two from Iquitos in Pem, one from Minas Gerais in southeastem Brazil, and two from extratropical Brazil, clearly escaped from cultivation.
In Mexico var. hispida has been found in the garden city of C6rdoba, not probably wild, but also in two places on the Pacific slope in Guerrero and Oaxaca, outside the range of the other two varieties and apparently in deep countryside.
It is conceivable therefore that var. hispida arose in southwestern Mexico and was thence introduced, at first deliberately as a curiosity and subsequently as an invasive weed in Africa, India and elsewhere, where according to Ridley (Dispersal of plants throughout the world 587, pi. XIX, fig. 7, 8, 1930) it was passed from mission to mission by Jesuit fathers.
Brenan's hypothesis of introgression between var. hispida and var. unijuga is not supported by this analysis of distribution.
While Brenan's three varieties of M. pudica are strongly marked in the Old World, in the neotropics continuous and independent variation in stipule-length and stem-pubescence makes these characters weak and sometimes contradictory taxonomic markers.
The following key is accordingly a simplified version of Brenan's and includes, moreover, a minor new taxon from Guyana.
Key to varieties of M. pudica 1.
CoroUa-lobes glabrous extemally; pinnae either 1- or 2-jug 379a. var. unijuga (p. 627).
1.
CoroUa-lobes gray-puberulent dorsally.
2.
Floral bracts at and beyond mid-capitulum 0.7-2 mm, bent inward beyond middle, distally ciliolate with setulae less than 0.9 mm, just prior to anthesis shorter than the subtended fl-bud.
3.
Stems aculeate; faces of pod usually glabrous, rarely pubemlent or both puberulent and weakly setulose 379b. var. tetrandra (p. 627).
3.
Stems unarmed; faces of pod at once densely pubemlent overall and densely setose over each seed; interior Guyana 379c. var. pastoris (p. 628).
2.
Floral bracts at and beyond mid-capitulum 1.7-2.5 mm, bent inward near or below middle, distally ciliate with setae to 1-1.6 mm, just prior to anthesis as long as or longer than the subtended fl-bud.
379d. var. hispida (p. 629).
379a. Mimosa pudica Linnaeus var. unijuga (Walpers & Duchassaing) Grisebach, Abh.
Konigl.
Ges.
Wiss.
Gottingen 7: 211.
1857 & H. Brit.
W.I.
219.
1864.
M. unijuga Walpers & Duchassaing, Linnaea 23: 744.
1850.— "Crescit in insula Guadeloupe et ad Caracas (e seminibus Caracasanis enata in horto botanico Berolinensi colitur)."
—Lectotypus (Brenan, 1955: 189), Duchassaing s.n. from Guadeloupe, GOET (not seen); presumed isotypus, "in campis humidis Guadeloupe," Duchassaing s.n.,
P! M. irritabilis K. Presl, Abh.
Konigl.
Bohm.
Ges.
Wiss.
V, 3: 494.
1845. [Bot. Bemerk.
64.
1844[1846U.- "Habitat in Martinica, Kohaut."
—Holotypus, F. Kohaut in F. W. Sieber, Herb, martinic. suppl. 13, PR!; isotypi, M! PRC! W! M. pudibunda Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1032.
1806.— 'Habitat in Bahia Brasiliae . .. [Sieber, commun.] Com. de Hoffinannsegg."
—Holotypus, B-WILLD 19068, seen in microfiche! M. endymionis Martius, Flora 21(1, Beibl.
4-5): 51 (=Herb.fl.bras.
131).
1838.—Crescit in interioribus regionibus Prov. Bahiensis ad Malhada."
—Holotypus, Ml M. pudica j8 forma glabrior Bentham, 1876: 397, synonymis inclusis.
M. pudica fma glabrior Bentham ex Fawcett & Rendle, Fl.
Jamaica 4: 134.
1920.
M. pudica sensu Proctor, Fl.
Cayman Is. 478,fig.143.
1984; Liogier, 1985: 51.
M. pudica var. unijuga sensu Bassler, 1985: 607.
Characters as given in key to varieties; stems hispidulous to subglabrous.
On streambanks, along ditches, in disturbed or waste places and in pastures, mostly below 250 m, but as a weed ascending to 1000 m or more, widespread and locally abundant around and within the Caribbean basin, thence extending rarely to the Bahamas and w. to the s. periphery of Gulf of Mexico, and s. to scattered stations on both slopes in Central America; in S. America s. intermptedly through Colombia to lowland w. Ecuador, and from Trinidad s. through the Guianas to Para, Brazil, discontinuously to Bahia; isolated in n.-e. Bolivia and adj. Brazil (Rondonia).
In the Old World extensively naturaUzed in s.-e. Asia (Burma, Vietnam), Sri Lanka, Polynesia, and sparingly so in e. tropical Africa (Brenan, 1959), Reunion.
Hawaiian Is. Map 57.
It seems likely, but not demonstrable from hard evidence, that an earlier name for var. unijuga is M. pudica /? glabrata DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 426.
1825, based on Mimosa humilis, frutescens et spinosa, siliquis conglobatis Plumier ex Burman, PI. amer. fasc.
9: t. 202.
1759, "in ins.
Sancti-Domingi et Sancti-Thomasii."
—All modem collections from Hispaniola that I have seen represent var. unijuga, the dominant form of the species throughout the Antilles, as do all the five known collections from St. Thomas.
However, Plumier's plate, at least in Burman's reproduction, lacks the fine detail on which varietal identity hinges, and I therefore follow Brenan in discarding var. glabrata as ambiguous.
379b. Mimosa pudica Linnaeus var. tetrandra (Willdenow) DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 426.
1825.
M. tetrandra Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1032.
1^06.—Habitat in America meridionali."
, the exact locality given by Humboldt & Bonpland, Nov. gen. sp. 6(qu): 252.1824: "in ripa fluminis Magdalenae, prope Garapatas [Colombia, near 7°N]."—Holotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland 1631, B-WILLD 19069, seen in microfiche!; isotypus, P-HBK! M. hispidula Humboldt & Bonpland, Nov. gen. sp. 6(qu): 252.
1824.—"Crescit in ripa fluminis Orinoci, prope Santa Barbara."
-Holotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland 1160, sub nom 'M. hispida," P-HBK! M. pudica a forma hispidior Bentham, 1875: 397, ex parte, inclus. synonymis supra citatis.
M. pudica fma hispidior Bentham ex Fawcett & Rendle, Fl.
Jamaica 4: 134.
1920.
M. pudica var. tetrandra sensu Bassler, 1985:606; Lewis, 1987, fig. 9R. Characters as given in key to varieties; stems variably hispidulous or loosely strigose.
On waysides, in fields and pastures, in disturbed bmsh-woodland, in vemally wet savannas, and in urban wasteland, mostly in the lowlands but as a weed at elevations to and perhaps beyond 1200 m, widespread, locally abundant and ostensibly native on the Pacific coast and 1 0 0 / 5 ^ 9 0 *^^o -•' '1 8 0 1 "i '^.' ^:> <;>£(^ 7 0 CZP< 6 0 0 50 40 MIMOSA PUDICA var. TETRANDRA -^': MAP 57.
Parts of Mexico, the West Indies, and tropical South America.
Range of M pudica Linnaeus var. tetrandra (Willdenow) DeCandolle. inter-cordilleran valleys of Colombia and east through the Orinoco basin and foothills of Cordillera Costanera in Venezuela to Trinidad and Tobago, s. to the Guianas and the savannas of upper rio Branco in Brazil; sporadically n. to Costa Rica and s. Mexico (Chiapas), Cuba, and Lesser Antilles, and s. in Brazil, at scattered points, to coastal and interior Bahia, Espirito Santo, and Rio de Janeiro.
Naturalized sparingly in tropical Africa, s. China (and probably elsewhere in s.-e. Asia) and New Caledonia.—Fl. throughout the year unless drought-inhibited.
Map 58.
379c. Mimosa pudica Linnaeus var. pastoris Bameby, var. nov., ab aliis speciei formis caulibus petiolisque omnino inermibus necnon leguminis valvulis simul totis dense pubemlis ac dense delicatim setosis diversa, caeterius cum var. tetrandra congrua.—Guyana.
Sand Creek, Rupununi River, VIII/48 (fl, fr), Wilson-Brown 23 in Forest Dept.
British Guiana.—Holotypus, NY.
Characters as given in key to varieties; stems hispidulous in the specimens seen, but indumentum said by the collector to be variable.
In damp places on savanna, ± 200 m, known only from the Rupununi valley near 3°S in s.-w. Guyana.-n. (?-)VII-IX(-?).
Map 59.
Over much of the range of M. pudica sensu lato the valves of the pod are glabrous.
Locally in northem Roraima, Brazil the faces of the pod are pubemlent and sometimes also finely thinly setulose.
The extreme variant here described as var. pastoris (in memory of the discoverer.
Father Wilson-Brown) has the indumentum of the MAP 58.
Southeastem Mexico, the Caribbean Basin, and tropical South America.
Range of M. pudica Linnaeus var. unijuga (Walpers & Duchassaing) Grisebach. pod much augmented and simultaneously has lost all cauline aculei.
More collections are needed to demonstrate the constancy of these characters.
379d. Mimosa pudica Linnaeus var. hispida Brenan, Kew BuU.
1955(2): 186.
1955.-"Java.
Junghuhn 779."—Holotypus, K! (?) M. striato-stipula Steudel, Flora 26: 758.
1843.- "... Hostmann und Kappler im Innem von Surinam.
.
. ."—No typus found (perhaps overlooked) at P in 1985.
Referred by Bentham to his M. pudica 'forma hispidior,' which included the present var. tetrandra and var. hispida.
An unnumbered collection by Kappler from the Marowijn river (NY) is var. hispida and possibly an isotypus of M. striatostipula.
The "4-jugate" pinnae ofthe protologue may well arise from the common error of counting individual pinnae as juga.
M. andreana Britton & Rose in Britton & Killip, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 35: 151.
1936.-"[Colombia, probably Cauca:] Mercuadores [on original label: Mercaderes, and. mend.
Nov. Gran.], April 29, 1876, E. Andre 2927."-Holotypus, NY! M. pudica a. forma hispidior Bentham, 1875: 397, ex parte.
M. pudica fma hispidior Fawcett & Rendle, Fl.
Jamaica 4: 134.
1920, ex parte.
M. pudica var. hispida sensu Bassler, 1985: 606.
Characters as given in key to varieties; stems characteristically long-hispid.
Of uncertain nativity, known mostly from secondary habitats and in cultivation, erratically distributed in the Americas: in s. Mexico (Guerrero, Veracmz, Chiapas); centr. Costa Rica; Cuba and Jamaica; s. Colombia (M. andreana); Pemvian Amazonia (Loreto, certainly introduced); and in e. Brazil along the coast and inland to 1500 m from Minas Gerais to Sta. Catarina.
In the Old World extensively naturalized and at times invasively weedy, in equatorial Africa, India, the Philippines, Bomeo and Java, Queensland, the Caroline and Mariana Is., probably MAP 59.
The American Tropics.
Ranges of M pudica Linnaeus var. hispida Brenan in the New World, and var. pastoris. elsewhere.—Fl. indefinitely through the year.
Map 59.
The type of M. andreana, a truncated stem in young flower, is unusual in having three pairs of pinnae in all leaves that were collected.
Similar leaves are known occasionally in the variety (e.g., Croat 18010, ^HY), but I have seen no other example of uniformly trijugate pinnae.
Britton and Killip keyed M. andreana among 'woody species,' but there is nothing in the type-specimen to suggest a habit more fmticose than adult M. pudica sensu lato.
380.
Mimosa polydactyla Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, Sp. pi. 4: 1033.
1806.- " .
.
. in America meridionali ad fluvium nigrum prope St. Carlos [s.-w. T. F. Amazonas, Venezuela]."-Holotypus, B-WILLD = F Neg. 13581; isotypus, Humboldt & Bonpland 1161, P-HBK! Caaeo, sp. #3, Marcgrave, Hist. nat. Bras.
74 + fig. 1648.
Aeschynomenespinosa tertia. .. Breyne, Exot. pi. cent. 40, t. 18 (sub Mimosa).
1678 ±.—Cultivated in Danzig from seeds collected in Brazil.
Mimosa glockeri Meissner ex Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 397.
1875, nom. nud. in syn.— Glocker 177, NY (hb. Meissn.)! BM (hb. Shuttlew.)! M. hexaphylla Salzmann ex Bentham, 1875, I.e., nom. nud. in syn.—"M 6-phylla" e Bahia, Salzmann s.n.,
E! K (hb. Benth.)! M. polydactyla sensu Kunth, Mimoses 14, t. 5.
1819; Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, 1824: 253; Bentham, 1841: 367; 1875: 397; 1876: 317; Britton & Rose, 1928: 152; Britton & Killip, 1936: 51; Lewis, 1987, fig. 90.
Diffiise, ascending or sometimes scrambling, in age suflfrutescent, microphylUdious herbs (2-)5- 16(-20) dm, the terete stramineous or reddishbrown stems armed at or shortly below each node with a pair of stout recurved broad-based browntipped aculei 1.5-5 mm and often also with l(-2) similar infrapetiolar ones variably displaced downward, the cauline and foliar axes thinly hispid or strigose with either erect, ascending, or less often forwardly subappressed, stiff but slender, brown or brown-tipped setae to 1-2.3 mm mixed or not with fine pubemlence, the sensitive subpalmately pinnate lvs olivaceous bicolored, the narrow plane thin-textured lfts a little paler beneath, commonly glabrous facially and forwardly setose-ciliate, sometimes dorsally appressed-setose-silky, the small ovoidellipsoid capitula either solitary or paired, rarely to 4 together, in a long succession of If-axils, on peduncle shorter than subtending lf-stk. Stipules erect, Unear-attenuate or subsetiform 4-8 x 0.25- 0.6 mm, 1-nerved dorsally, pectinately setoseciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (1.5-)2-6(-7) cm, the petiole including elongate discolored pulvinus 1.5-5.5(-6.5) cm, grooved both ventrally and laterally, at middle 0.6-1.1 mm diam., the 2-4 interpinnal segments commonly 1-2 mm, sometimes almost 0; spicules 0; pinnae 3-5-jug. (of some early lvs 2-jug., no further described), ordinarily accrescent distally but sometimes equilong, the rachis of longer ones 4-10(-l 1) cm, the interfoliolar segments 1-2 mm; lfts oflonger pinnae (28-)30-55(-65)-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.7-2.3 mm distant from linear-subulate paraphyllidia 0.5-1.4 mm, all in outline linear-acute from semicordate base, straight or nearly so, those near mid-rachis (4-)5- 9 X (0.6-)0.8-1.8 mm, 5.5-7.5 times as long as wide, aU veinless above, beneath 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric prominulous pallid midrib weakly 2-4-branched mostly beyond middle, the adjacent posterior nerve scarcely attaining mid-blade, the outer posterior one very short or obsolescent.
Peduncles 7-15 mm; capitula without filaments 3-4 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, but hispid with emergent bracteal setae; bracts linear or linear-elliptic 0.7- 1 X 0.15-0.25 mm, 1-nerved, charged on each margin distally with 2-3 pallid ascending setae; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, usually all bisexual and fertile; calyx submembranous 0.2-0.4 mm, glabrous extemally, the irregularly or obscurely lobulate rim sometimes minutely setulose; corolla submembranous, narrowly vase-shaped 1.1- 1.7 mm, the almost plane, dorsally low-carinate lobes 0.45-0.7 x 0.3-0.5 mm, extemally either glabrous or minutely hispidulous; filaments pale pink or whitish, obscurely monadelphous at very base, exserted ±2-2.5 mm.
Pods radiating from receptacle in dense spherical clusters, subsessile, the body of each in profile narrowly oblong 9- 15 X 3.5-4.5 mm, (2-)3-4-seeded, the undulately constricted replum 0.2-0.4 mm wide, contracted at apex into an erect cusp, with divaricate straight tapering stramineous or livid setae to 2- 4 mm along lateral and dorsal ribs, the papery greenish-brown, when ripe brown or blackish valves also thinly or randomly setose and sometimes in addition microscopically pubemlent, breaking up when ripe into free-falling biconvex, individually indehiscent articles ±2.5-3.5 mm long; 5^^t/5 lentiform 2.3-2.8 x ± 2 mm, the testa olive-drab or reddish-fawn, under magnification X 30 minutely roughened.
A weedy mimosa of disturbed forest, bmshwoodland, pasture thickets, hedgerows and ditchbanks mostly below 350 m, but attaining 1000 m in Ecuador and s.-e. Brazil, intermptedly widespread in the Amazon Basin from s.-w. Venezuela and e. Colombia to n.-e. Pem, and e. in Brazil to Para, thence n.-w. in scattered stations to the Pacific slope in Colombia (Choc6) and Central America (Panama and Costa Rica), and n.-e., mostly along and near the Atlantic seaboard, less commonly inland, through the three Guianas to the Guayana Highland in Bolivar and Delta-Amacuro, Venezuela, and s.-e. in Brazil to central Minas Gerais and the Organ Mts. in Rio de Janeiro; Martinique; naturalized in equatorial w. Africa (Ilha S. Tome fide Exell, Vase.
PI.
S. Tome 169.
1944).—Fl. throughout the year except when drought-inhibited.
Map 60.
Mimosa polydactyla is evidently most closely related to M. pudica, which it resembles in its weedy, weakly suffrutescent habit of growth, in subpalmately pinnate leaves, in relatively simple leaflet-venation, and in much reduced calyx, all advanced characters in the genus.
The differences between them in leaf-formula, while usually instantly apparent in mature specimens, are not individually absolute.
Some leaves of each may have just three pairs of pinnae, and some pinnae of each may have about thirty pairs of leaflets.
However, when pinnae of most leaves are three MAP 60.
Tropical North and South America.
Range of M. polydactyla Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow. pairs the leaflet-number is decisive and when leaflet-number is ambiguous the number of pinnae is decisive.
Only quite immature or incomplete specimens present any problems in identification.
Mimosa verecunda, similar in leafformula, has pinnae more openly spaced along the upper leaf-stalk in most leaves, but is most reliably distinguished by the paleaceous-pappiform calyx, and most readily so by allopatric (upland planaltine) distribution.
381.
Mimosa huberi Bameby, sp. nov., cum M. hirsutissima (seu M. tomentosa Humboldt & Bonpland ex WiUdenow, non Rottling) arete secus fluminis Orinoco medii ripas sympatrica hucusque confusa, ab ea tamen setis caulinis scabemlis (nec laevibus), pinnis palmatim 2- 3 (nec 1- vel pinnatim 2)-jugis, foliolis usque 21-32 (nec 10-18)-jugis, necnon calycis pappiformis lobis fere ad ipsum tubi orem in setas dissolutis diversa.—Venezuela.
T. F. Amazonas: Depto.
Atures, en la region de Rincones de Chacorro, a unos 30 km al N de Puerto Ayacucho, 5°48'N, 67°20'W, ±80 m, 23.
IX.1980 (fl), O. Huber 5770.-Holotypus, NY; isotypi, K, NY.
Unarmed suffruticose herbs or clambering subshrubs with several stems erect-ascending in clumps, at anthesis 0.5-1.5 or potentially 2 m tall, toward base early defoliate, upward together with all Ifand inflorescence-axes densely hirsute with fine spreading or declined scabemlous setae to 1-2 mm, the coarsely palmatipinnate lvs bicolored, the lfts brownor pinkish-gray and silkystrigulose above, beneath paler and more densely subappressed-pilose, the ellipsoid capitula at first axillary, later forming an at least shortly exserted pseudoraceme sometimes attaining 2.5 dm but often shorter.
Stipules erect-incurved, narrowly lance-acuminate 5-8 x 0.7-1 mm, convex and densely setulose dorsally, subpersistent.
Leafstalks (0.8-)l-4 cm, at middle 1-1.8 mm diam., obscurely sulcate ventrally, the interpinnal segments to 3 mm or the pinna-pulvini contiguous; spicules 0; pinnae of major lvs 2-4-jug., of some uppermost lvs 1 -jug.,
the distal pair longest, their rachis 4.5-13 cm, the interfoliolar segments to 2-5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 21-32-jug., decrescent only at ends of rachis, the small first pair 1-2 mm distant from deflexed, narrowly subulate paraphyllidia 1.2-2.2 mm, the blades narrowly oblong or lance-oblong from broadly obtusely auriculate base, abmptly acuminulate, those near mid-rachis (9.5-) 10-18(-20) x 2.2-4 mm, (2.8-)3-4.2(-5) times as long as wide, all nerveless or almost so above, beneath 3-nerved from pulvinule, the straight simple midrib dividing blade ±1:2, the inner posterior nerve expiring near or below midblade, the outer one shorter, the plane margin densely finely ciliolate, not setose.
Peduncles 2-4-nate, the longer ones (10-) 14-20 mm; capitula without filaments 6- 10 X 4.5-5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform (but bract-tips sometimes briefly emergent), the flbuds densely antrorse-pubemlent; bracts linear or linear-oblanceolate 0.7-1.2 x 0.15-0.25 mm, 1-nerved, shortly setulose-ciliolate distally, deciduous;y/ovv^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx pappiform 0.8-1.2 mm, the shallowly campanulate brown tube ±0.2 mm deep, the lobes decompound almost or quite to its rim into weak pallid setulae; corolla narrowly vase-shaped ±1.3 mm, the cymbiform but scarcely thickened lobes ±0.6 x 0.3 mm, carinate dorsally; filaments pink fading whitish, free to base, exserted 4-5 mm; ovary glabrous before anthesis, then pubemlent.
Pods 1-4 per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately linear ± 15-20 X 4 mm, 3-5-seeded, the constricted replum 0.3- 0.45 mm wide, the brown papery valves coUiculate over each seed, like the replum densely pubemlent and yellowish-hispidulous overall, when ripe breaking up into free-falling indehiscent articles 3-4.5 mm long; seeds (few seen) lentiform ±2.5-2.7 X 2.2 mm, the smooth testa pinkish-brown or fuscous.
About bush-islands in savanna and on exposed laja, ±80-120 m, known only from the valley of the Orinoco river, from a point about 30 km upstream from Ayacucho in T. F. Amazonas (depto. Atures) down just into adj. state of Bolivar, Venezuela.-Fl.
IX-XII(-?) Mimosa huberi is sympatric with the phase of M. (subser. Hirsutae) hirsutissima that has passed in Venezuela as M. tomentosa H. & B. ex WiUd.,
and has been confused with it in herbaria.
It is a more robust and more erect plant, with palmatipinnate leaves and more numerous, more simply veined leaflets, and differs further in cauline vesture of scabemlous setae and in smaller pappiform, not paleaceous calyx.
In habit and foliage it recalls Brazilian M. vestita, but this has smaller leaves, smooth setae, and paleaceous calyx.
The species is dedicated with gratitude to Dr. Otto Huber of Caracas, whose collections from Venezuelan Guayana have enormously enriched the herbarium of New York Botanical Garden.
382.
Mimosa guaviarensis Bameby, sp. nov., ab affini M. pudica caulibus virgatim erectis et conferte foliatis, foliis abbreviatis, petiolo 4- 6 (nec 15-50) mm et pinnamm rachi 14-21 (nec 20-65) mm longis primo intuitu diversa.—Colombia.
Vaupes: San Jose del Guaviare, sabana, 240 m, 11.
XI. 1939 (fl, fr), /.
Cuatrecasas 76^5.—Holotypus, COL 7648; isotypus, F 1245795 = NY Neg. 11906.
Microphyllidious subshrubs of unknown stature, armed at nodes with a pair of straight, spreading-ascending stramineous infrastipular aculei 2-6.5 mm and also on some intemodes with a downwardly displaced infrapetiolar one, the stiff, simply virgate, closely foliate stem passing upward into an efoliate (perhaps largely hysteranthously leafy) pseudoraceme of smaU ovoidellipsoid capitula, except for facially glabrous lfts silky throughout with fine, narrowly ascending setae to 2-2.5 mm, the small lfts concolorous and closely inbricate.
Stipules firm erect lanceolate 2.5-6 mm, setose dorsally, striate glabrous within, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including firm pulvinus 4-6 X 0.4-0.5 mm, espiculate, some charged on dorsal rib with a few random ascending aculeoli; pinnae 1-2-jug., when 2-jug. subpalmately so, the interpinnal rachis not over 1 mm; rachis of pinnae 14-21 (-25) mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.4-1 mm; lfts (14-) 16-27- jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair close to pulvinus, the blades linear acute from proximaUy auriculate base, those near midrachis 4-5.5(-7) X 0.5-0.9 mm, ±6-8 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 3-5- nerved from pulvinule, the nearly centric midrib pinnately 2-3-branched on each side from near middle upward, the posterior primary nerves much shorter, the margin finely discontinuously appressed-setose-cUiate.
Peduncles soUtary at base of inflorescence but distally fasciculate by 2-4, becoming 10-17 mm; capitula without filaments ± 5 x 4 mm, prior to anthesis hispidulous with shortly emergent bracteal cilia; bracts linear-attenuate 1.5-2 X 0.2 mm, 1-nerved, glabrous except for 2-3 setulae on each margin; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx an obscure collar not over 0.1 mm; coroUa turbinate-campanulate ±1.8 mm, the membranous ovate 1-nerved lobes ±0.5 mm, hispidulous dorsally; filaments (pink) free to base, exserted ±3 mm.
Pods to 10 per capitulum, sessile, in outline undulately narrow-oblong 6-12 X 3.5 mm, 2-4-seeded, the constricted replum 0.25 mm diam., armed on dorsal and lateral ribs with divaricate setae 0.5-3 mm, the papery brown valves low-convex over each seed, thinly minutely pubemlent and yellow-granular, when ripe breaking up into free-falling articles ± 3 mm long. In savanna near 240 m, known only from the upper Guaviare valley near 72°40'W in n.-w. Vaupes, Colombia.-n. X-XII(-?).
Mimosa guaviarensis appears closely related to M. pudica, to which Killip referred the typecollection, but it differs in stiffly virgate growthhabit, and especially in the small, shortly petiolate leaves crowded along the stem.
Cuatrecasas recorded the plant as frutex, but did not note its stature.
The specimens suggest a suffmticose wandlike mimosa of a type common in campo and cerrado habitats south of Amazonia.
No Colombian mimosa at all closely resembles it.
383.
Mimosa verecunda Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 368.
IS41.-''Brazil, Pohr\ the locality precised in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 318.
1876: "in provincia Goyaz ad Santa Rita [near 15°30'S in w.-centr. Goias]."-Holotypus, Pohl [1922] = d.l475, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 7797; isotypi, M! = F Neg. 6198, NY! W! M. verecunda sensu Bentham, 1875: 397.
M. polycarpa sensu Glaziou, 1906: 178, ex parte (no. 21068).
Virgately erect or pliantly arching, microphyllidious shrubs and subshrubs 1-3 m, commonly armed at or shortly below each node with a pair of recurved broad-based stramineous aculei 1-4 mm and sometimes in addition with a few scattered intemodal or distantly infrastipular ones, occasionally unarmed, the homotinous stems, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence strigose or rarely hirsute with forwardly appressed or exceptionally spreading-ascending, tapering or flagelliform, whitish or refuscent setae to 1-3 mm, mixed or not with minute pubemlence, the foliage olivaceous, the narrow crowded thin-textured lfts ± bicolor, green and either glabrous or finely minutely pubemlent above, beneath paler, commonly purple-tipped, subappressed-silkysetose, the margins finely setose-ciliate, the numerous small, plumply ovoid capitula mostly verticillate by 2-7 in upper If-axils and beyond, forming a simple dense, basally foliate and either distally efoliate or hysteranthously leafy pseudoraceme 1.5-5(-7) dm long. Stipules firm erect, lanceolate or Unear-attenuate 3.5-8 x 0.5-1.4 mm, coarsely 3-nerved, dorsally either setulose and pubemlent or glabrous, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (sensitive, in most specimens deflexed) subterete, those of most lvs 2-9(-ll) cm (of small bracteiform uppermost lvs shorter, no further described), the petiole 1.5-6(-7) cm, at middle (0.4-)0.5-0.9 mm diam., the interpinnal segments (1-)2-l 1(-14) mm, spicules 0; pinnae of longer lvs 2-5 (of random distal lvs only l)-jug, either the proximal or the distal ones longest, the rachis of longer ones (3.5-)4-8.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1-2.1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 38-55(-60)-jug., decrescent toward each end of rachis, the first pair less than 1 mm distant from subulate-setiform paraphylUdia 0.8- 2.2 mm, all in outline linear or Unear-lanceolate, acute and mucronate, from semicordate base, those near mid-rachis 4.5-8.5 x (0.5-)0.6-1.3 mm, (5.8-)6-9 times as long as wide, aU smooth above, dorsally 1-nerved by simple subcentric costa, this commonly immersed proximally but prominulous and pallid near blade apex.
Peduncles 6-21 mm; capitula without filaments 4.5- 5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but hispidulous with emergent bracteal setae; bracts oblanceolate incurved 1.2-1.8 x 0.3-0.5 mm, dorsally glabrous and carinate by midrib, setoseciliolate distally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, a few proximal ones sometimes staminate but mostly bisexual; calyx paleaceous-pappiform, the membranous tube 0.2-0.4 mm, extemally glabrous, entire or irregularly cleft, the rim ciliate with subcapillary, sometimes obscurely confluent setae to 0.6-1.1 mm; corolla membranous subcylindric 1.8-2.7 mm, the cymbiform, weakly carinate and scarcely thickened lobes 0.55-0.8 X 0.4-0.5 mm, hispidulous distally; filaments lilac-pink, weakly monadelphous through 0.2- 0.5 mm, exserted 4-6 mm; ovary minutely stipitate glabrous.
Pods usually numerous in each capitulum and forming a radiating cluster, subsessile, in outline narrowly oblong 13-19 x 4-5 mm, abmptly contracted into an apical cusp 2- 3 mm, the shallowly constricted replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, hispid with three or more files of divaricate setae of different lengths (the longer to 2.5-5 mm), the papery green or brownish valves glabrous to thinly retrostrigulose or at once setulose and densely pubemlent, when ripe breaking up into free-falling biconvex articles 4-5 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
Along margin of gallery forest and in adjoining cerrado, 850-1050 m, locally common between 13°30' and 18°30'S in centr. and s.-e. Goias and in the enclave of Distrito Federal, Brazil.—Fl. (I-)II-VI. Because of the two to five pairs of pinnae in each major cauUne leaf, M. verecunda was aligned by Bentham (1875: 397) in ser. Pudicae next following M. polydactyla, but its really close kinship, if this can be inferred from similarity in leaflets, inflorescence, calyx, and craspedium, is with conjugately pinnate M. xanthocentra.
Like the latter, M. verecunda occurs in armed and (less common) unarmed states, and is similarly variable in indumentum, the type specimens, for example, having hispid stems but most modem examples strigose ones.
In its upland planaltine range of dispersal M. verecunda differs in number of pinnae from all sympatric eu-mimosas other than Mm. pudica, hirsutissima, ruftpila, macrocephala, procurrens, and plurijugate forms of M. distans; but it exceeds all these in number of leaflets (38-90 pairs in longer pinnae), and differs further either in narrower leaflets, or in stmcture of the calyx, or in both at once.
384.
Mimosa xanthocentra Martius, Flora 21(2, Beibl.
4-5): 50 (=Herb. fl. bras. 130).
1838.- Typus infra sub var. xanthocentra indicatur.
Microphyllidious, most often functionally herbaceous, precociously flowering subshrubs from woody roots or short caudex (1-)3-15(-20) dm (exceptionally fmticose and attaining 3-4 m), the either solitary or several stems assurgent or stiffly erect (less often subdiffuse) and either simple or few-branched, either densely or subremotely foliate and either unarmed or armed with recurved, immediately infrastipular or both infrastipular and few intemodal aculei l-4(-6) mm, the stems in addition, like lf-stks and peduncles, either strigose or pilose in variable density with lustrous white, narrowly ascending or appressed, or finer elongate, flexuously spreading flagelliform, or coarse spreading-incurved to subretrorse setae to 2-6 mm, the usually imbricate lfts dorsally strigose or pilose in variable density with lustrous, narrowly ascending or appressed trichomes, green to silky-silvery, ventrally loosely pubemlent to strigulose or glabrous, the small ovoid-ellipsoid capitula all axillary at anthesis or some forming a shortly exserted or hysteranthously foliate pseudoraceme.
Stipules usually lanceolate or Unear-attenuate (3-)4-12(-15) X (0.3-)0.5-1.5mm and coarsely 3-7-nerved, sometimes broadly lanceolate to 2.5 mm wide and to 9-11-nerved, persistent, green or reddish-brown, extemally either glabrous, pubemlent, or rarely setose, if setose then less densely so than adjacent stem.
Leafstalks of major cauline lvs (0-)4-45(-65) mm, often progressively shorter or even obsolescent distally, always espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones commonly 6-12(-l 4) cm, less often only 4-6 or even (vars. tenuis, exilis) only 2-4.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.8- 4 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (20-)30-82(-105)- jug., the small proximal pair close to linear or acicular paraphyllidia (sometimes concealed by setae), those at mid-rachis narrowly oblong, Unear-lanceolate or linear from obliquely obtusangulate base, straight or a little incurved beyond middle, acute or sharply apiculate, the longer ones (3-)3.5-12(-19) x (0.5-)0.7-3.3 mm, the thin-textured, when dry brittle blades carinate dorsaUy by the subcentric midrib, veinless above.
Peduncles fasciculate by 2-4(-5) or at some nodes solitary, (3-)5-20 mm; capitula without filaments (5-)6-9(-10) X (2.5-)3.5-7 mm, prior to anthesis either conelike or moriform, the obovoid, gray-pUosulous fl-buds either shorter or longer than the bracts, these oblanceolate 0.7-1 or commonly 1.5-3.5(-4) x (0.2-)0.3-0.7(-0.8) mm, variably ciliate;flowers4-merous 4-androus, some or many lower ones staminate; calyx paleaceous-pappiform (1-)1.3-3 mm, the lobes decompound from halfway or almost to base into subcapiUary setae; corolla (1.2-) 1.6-3 mm, the ovate submembranous, dorsaUy keeled lobes 0.5- 1.1 X 0.4—0.7 mm; filaments pink, weakly united at base (below the ovary), exserted (3-)5-9.5 (-10) mm.
Pods commonly 2-12 from above middle of receptacle, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong 3-4.5 mm wide and varying from (1-)2- seeded and (6-)8-10 mm long to 3-seeded and ±13-16 mm long, or 4-seeded and 16-22(-25) mm long, the straight or shallowly undulate replum 0.3-0.7 mm wide, hispid with pluriseriate yellowish setae (1.5-)2.5-7 mm either subcontiguous or distant 1-2 times their basal diameter, the papery brown valves usually villosulous esetulose, or sometimes quite glabrous, or sometimes at once villosulous and setose, but the setae always shorter than those of replum and nearly always retrorsely descending, the ripe valves separating from replum and breaking up into freefalling 1-seeded articles 2.6-4.5(-5) mm long; seeds plumply obovoid or rhombic-obovoid 2.6- 3.5 X 2.1-2.6 mm, when naturally ripened smooth, light tan, darker when heat-dried.
I have assembled under the title of M. xanthocentra two series of forms, one unarmed, the other armed at nodes with infrastipular prickles and sometimes with intemodal prickles as well.
AU have essentially the same ellipsoid capitula of apically villosulous flowers, the same deeply dissected or fringed calyx, the same leaflet-venation reduced to a simple, subcentric midrib raised only on the dorsal face, and the same pod except insofar as this varies in hispid armament or pubescence of valves and replum.
The aculeate series corresponds with M. xanthocentra s. str., M. polycarpa sensu Bentham (but not of Kunth), M. stenoptera Bentham as extended by Burkart, and the insubstantial M. mansii Martius.
The unarmed series consists of M. subsericea Bentham, M. stipularis Bentham, M. goyazensis Bentham, M. tremula Bentham, and M. longepetiolata Malme, an intergradient set of forms distinguished only with difficulty by stature, indumentum, width of stipules and leaflets, and girth of capitula.
In this enlarged sense M. xanthocentra embraces elements of Bentham's series Meticulosae and Pectinatae, which had been artificially separated by emphasis on aculei and on strength or continuity of the leaflet's marginal nerve.
Armed and unarmed forms of M. xanthocentra exhibit the somewhat unusual concentric patterns of dispersal inexactly duplicated by the diplostemonous M. somnians (q.v.).
The unarmed forms of the species are widespread almost throughout the basins of the Paraguai and Parana basins upstream from their confluence, but extend outward only feebly, northward into the Tocantins and Araguaia vaUeys and eastward into the upper S. Francisco basin in Minas Gerais.
Aculeate plants are sympatric with unarmed ones over much of this range, but are most abundant around its northem, eastem and western periphery and extend far beyond it into northwestem Argentina, in Brazil to Maranhao, Piaui, central Minas Gerais and the Organ Mountains of Rio de Janeiro, and reappear on savannas of the Orinoco and Maracaibo basins in Colombia and Venezuela.
Interpretation of this dispersal pattem hinges on the primitive or derived nature of aculei in this group.
The prevalence of prickles in disparate species-groups of haplostemonous Mimosa suggests that epidermal armament dates back to an early stage of differentiation in the genus.
If this is so, unarmed M. xanthocentra subsp. subsericea and subsp. tremula are specialized derivatives of armed precursors, which they have replaced or threaten to replace over much of the Brazilian Planalto.
The alternative interpretation requires independent acquisition of aculei in Sa. do Espinha90, the Andean foothills, and north of the Amazonian Hylaea.
Further variation in foliage and indumentum is discussed under individual taxa.
Key to subdivisions of M. xanthocentra 1.
Stems armed with infrastipular and sometimes in addition with scattered intemodal aculei; I. subsp. xanthocentra: 2.
Longer lf-stks 10-45 mm; of discontinuous range: e. Brazil, from Piaui s. to Rio de Janeiro and e. Sta. Catarina, w. to centr. Bolivia and n.-w. Argentina (Jujuy, Salta), n. to the Orinoco and Maracaibo basins in Colombia and Venezuela 384/Ia. var. xanthocentra (p. 637).
2.
Longer lf-stks 3-10(-l 1) mm; of common occurrence in the Paraguai basin in Paraguay and aU adj. countries, n. and e., progressively scarce, to the upper Beni in Rondonia, to Sa. do Cachimbo in s.- w. Para, and to the Araguaia valley in n. Goias; a doubtful record from Colombia 384/Ib. var. mansii (p. 638).
Stems unarmed.
3.
Stems strigose or (distally) silky-pilose with appressed or narrowly ascending, distally sometimes flexuously ascending and flageUiform setae; II. subsp. subsericea: 4.
Lf-stks 2-7 mm; herbs and subshrubs, commonly less than 2 m; widespread.
5.
Rachis of longer pinnae (4-)5-12 cm and its lfts 30-82-jug.; planaltine Brazil, s.-ward from centr. Goias and centr. Minas Gerais, to e. Sta. Catarina, w. Paraguay and adj. Argentina, and e. Bolivia 384/IIb. var. subsericea (p. 640).
5.
Rachis of longer pinnae 2.5-4 cm and its lfts 20-30(-32)-jug.; highly localized within the range of the preceding.
6.
Capitula conelike, 5-6 mm diam.; setae of pod's replum over 3 mm; Distrito Federal, Brazil 384/IIc. var. exilis (p. 640).
6.
Capitula moriform, 2.5-3.5 mm diam.; setae of pod's replum 1.5-2.5 mm; s.-centr. Mato Grosso do Sul 384/IId. var. miseranda (p. 641).
4.
Lf-stks 20-65 mm; shrubs 2-4 m; local in s. Mato Grosso (Chapada dos Guimaraes) 384/IIa. var. longepetiolata (p. 639).
3.
Stems hispid with coarse, spreading-ascending or subretrorse setae; III. subsp. tremula: 7.
Lf-stks of lower lvs 4-15 mm, those of distal lvs progressively shorter or obsolescent; rachis of longer pinnae 4.5-9 cm and the longest lfts (5.5-)6.5-12 x 1.8-3.5 mm, aU blades pubescent on both faces; capitula without filaments 4.5-6 mm diam.; centr. and s. Goias to n.-centr. Minas Gerais 384/IIIa. var. tremula (p. 642).
7.
Lf-stks of almost all lvs reduced to pulvinus, the very longest not over 3 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 2-4.5 cm and the longest lfts 3-5.5 x 0.7-1.2 mm, glabrous ventrally; capitula without filaments 4-5 mm diam.; local in s.-e. Mato Grosso (Xavantina) and astride the e. S. PauloMinas Gerais boundary (Mogiguagu; Bocaina; Caldas) 384/IIIb. var. tenuis (p. 642).
384/1.
Mimosa xanthocentra Martius subsp. xanthocentra.
M. xanthocentra Martius, 1838, I.e., sensu pauUo ampliato.—Typus infra sub var. xanthocentra indicatur.
Prickles variable in strength and number, the longest l-4(-6) mm, when small and few easily overlooked and sometimes almost concealed by vesture; lfts of lvs at mid-stem commonly 35- 70-jug. per pinna, rarely 24-40- or to 105-jug., the blades usually greenish and finely strigose beneath or on both faces, seldom silky-pilose; valves of pod either glabrous, or finely pubemlent, or retrosetulose, the setae of replum (1-)2.5- 4.5 mm.
384/Ia. Mimosa xanthocentra Martius subsp. xanthocentra var. xanthocentra.
M. xanthocentra Martius, 1838, I.e., sens, str.—"Crescit in dumetis et agris Provinciae Piauhiensis."
— Holotypus, Martius s.n.,
M! —Incorrectly equated by Bentham, 1875:396, with M. polycarpa Kunth.
M. longipinna Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 366.
1841. —"Minas Geraes, Claussen.'" Lectotypus, Claussen 152, K! = NY Neg. 7 7<?9.-Incorrectly equated by Bentham, 1875: 396, with M. polycarpa Kunth.
M. stenoptera Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 395.
1875.—"... near Jujuy, in La Plata [n.-w. Argentina], P^flrce."
—Holotypus, collected in 11.1864, K! = Burkart, 1948, t. 12 (right).
M. killipii Britton & Rose ex Britton & Killip, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 35(3): 150.
1936.-"RioSurata valley, between Jaboncillo and Surata, Santander, Colombia .
.
.
Killip & Smith 76^7^."—Holotypus, NY! M. xanthocentra sensu Bentham, 1841: 366.
M. polycarpa sensu Bentham, 1875: 396 & 1876: 315, max. ex parte, exclus. pi. typica pemviana.
M. stenoptera sensu Burkart, 1948: 152, fig. 23S, t. 17 (left).
Leafstalks including pulvinus 8-45(-65) mm, some at midstem at least (10-)11 mm; interfoliolar segments of pinna-rachis 1.2-3 mm; larger lfts(5-)7-12(-19) X 1-2.5 mm.
In open places within bmsh-woodland and in various savanna communities, becoming weedy in capoeira and along highways, on the Brazilian Planalto mostly between 200 and 1100 m but attaining 1500 m in Minas Gerais, 1800 m in Colombia, and 2300 m in Argentina, discontinuously widespread: e. Brazil, from s. Maranhao and Piaui s. to Rio de Janeiro and e. Sta. Catarina, thence w. to centr. Bolivia and n.-w. Argentina (Jujuy, Salta), rare and occasional on the central Planalto where largely replaced by subsp. subsericea; disjunct in the middle Orinoco basin in Venezuela, and in Santander and Meta, CoMIMOSA XANTHOCENTRA subsp. XANTHOCENTRA: var. XANTHOCENTRA# var. MANSII • MAP 61.
Tropical and warm-temperate South America.
Range of M. xanthocentra Martius subsp. xanthocentra. lombia.—Fl. in Brazil and neighboring countries to the south mostly (I-)II-V(-VI), in n. S. America VII-III(-?).
Map 61.
384/Ib.
Mimosa xanthocentra Martius subsp. xanthocentra var. mansii (Martius) Bameby, stat. nov. M. mansii Martius, Flora 21(2, Beibl.
4-5): 50 (=Herb. fl. bras. 130).
1838.-"In humidis argillosis ad Cujaba [Mato Grosso, A. L. P. da Silva] Manso.'"—Holotypus, Silva Manso 55 in Martius Hb.
227, M!—isotypi, G (ex parte)! = F Neg. 28221; NY! W!; probable isotypus, numbered 225 (or 2281), K! (?) M. subsericea var. strigoso-aculeata Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 552 (=P1. hassler.
2: 408).
1904.—"[Paraguay:] in valle fluminis Y-aca ... pr. Chololo, Dec, [Hassler] n. 6636."—Holotypus, G!; isotypi, NY! P! M. subsericea var. strigoso-aculeata fma armata Chodat & Hassler, 1904, I.e.—"[Paraguay:] pr. Tobaty, Sept., [Hassler] n. 6107."—Holotypus, G!; isotypus, NY! M. subsericea var. hirsuto-strigosa fma acerosa Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 553 (=P1. hassler.
2: 409).
1904.-"[Paraguay:]... in campis CordUlera de Altos .. . [Hassler] n. 2972."—Holotypus, G, ex parte, one plant of this number at G and that at NY being var. subsericea] M. polycarpa var. subglabrata Hoehne, Com. lin. telegr., Bot. 8: 25.
1919.-''[Hoehne] nos.
5654 e 5659 .. .
Colhida en Caceres [s.-e. Mato Grosso]."—Isosyntypus (5654), MG! M. mfl«5» sensu Bentham, 1841: 366,1875: 396,1876: 316; Burkart, 1948: 156.
Like var. xanthocentra except for shorter leafstalks, those at mid-stem 3-8(-10) mm; interfoliolar segments of pinna-rachis 1-2 mm; longer lfts commonly 6-9(-10) x 0.7-2 mm.
Habitats of var. xanthocentra, mostly below 500 m, common and widespread below 450 m in the basin of rio Paraguai, from its sources in Mato Grosso and e. Bolivia s. through Paraguay into Corrientes, Argentina; from Mato Grosso extending n.-e. and to 600 m in cerrado across the Paraguay-Araguaia divide and scattered n.- ward to Sa. do Cachimbo in s.-w. Para and the middle Araguaia valley in n. Goias.—FI. season indefinite.
Map 61.
Mimosa mansii combines in one plant the habit and foliage of var. subsericea with the infrastipular aculei of M. xanthocentra and forms an indissoluble bond between these conceptual taxa, heretofore segregated into different series by the criterion of armament.
Burkart recognized that the so-called fma acerosa, despite its small infrastipular aculei, could not be specifically divorced from M. subsericea, but he did not pursue the logical projection of this insight into the taxonomy of sect. Mimosa.
384/11.
IVIimosa xanthocentra Martius subsp. subsericea (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. subsericea Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 380.
1841.—Typus infra sub var. subsericea indicatur.
Unarmed, the var. longepetiolata otherwise like var. xanthocentra, the rest resembling var. mansii in relatively short leaf-stalks 3-11(-14) mm; lfts as many or rarely fewer, green and thinly appressed-pilosulous dorsally to densely silverysilky-pilose; valves of pod either glabrous or pubemlent, exceptionally also setulose, but the replum usually densely setose-hispid, the longer setae 3.5-7 mm, those from edges of replum often forming an interlocking mesh over the valves and imprisoning the freed articles of the ripe fruit.
384/IIa.
Mimosa xanthocentra Martius subsp. subsericea (Bentham) Bameby var. longepetiolata (Malme) Bameby, stat. nov. M. longepetiolata Malme, Bih.
Kongl.
Svenska Vetensk.-Akad.
Handl.
25, AFD.
111(11): 39, fig. 5.
1900.—"Matto Grosso: Serra da Chapada [=Chapada dos Guimaraes], Buriti (In 'capoeira' vetusta.
Malme [Iter RegneU.
II:] 1738 B .
.
.)."-Holotypus, collected 16.
VI.1894 (fl, frjun), S (3 sheets)!,
one = NY Neg. 11850.
M. longepetiolata Malme, 1931: 50 (''longipetiolata").
Described as a shrub attaining 2-4 m, appressed-setose, the lfts olivaceous, pubemlent on both faces and also thinly appressed-setose dorsally; lf-stks 2-6.5 cm; rachis of pinnae (5.5-)7- 14 cm; lfts of longer pinnae typically 35-43-jug. and to 10-19 x 1.5-2.5 mm, sometimes twice as many (75-83-jug.) and only half as large (to 7.5-8.5 X 0.6-0.7 mm).
In disturbed woodland (? cerradao) near 700 m, known only from Chapada dos Guimaraes n.-e. of Cuyaba, Mato Grosso, Brazil.—Fl.
IVVII(-?).
This is an ambiguous mimosa, resembling var. xanthocentra in every respect except that it is unarmed.
Malme described it as shmbby and attaining a height of two to four meters, a stature that is quite unusual in M. xanthocentra, but I can find no difference in indumentum, flowerstructure, or pod.
In addition to the type-collection, in which pinnae of larger leaves bear about forty pairs of leaflets to 10-19 mm long, Malme secured also on the Chapada a similarly longpetiolate plant (Malme 11/3347, S) with twice as many leaflets about half as large, but seemingly not otherwise different.
Furthermore, he encountered in the same vicinity plants (Malme III 3327a, G, S; Malme s.n.,
2.
VI. and 6.
VI.1930, S) with aculeate stems that cannot be distinguished technically from some populations of extra-Brazilian var. xanthocentra.
These plants exhibit in a suggestive way a variation in leaflets parallel to that just described for unarmed var. longepetiolata, one (6.
VI) having about 40 pairs of large leaflets, the other to 105 pairs about half as long. It may be that var. longepetiolata is no more than a tall unarmed minor variant of var. xanthocentra, but the situation requires closer observation in the field.
In any event I feel confident that M. longepetiolata is properly to be contained in the broad concept of M. xanthocentra.
384/IIb.
Mimosa xanthocentra Martius subsp. subsericea (Bentham) Bameby var. subsericea.
M. subsericea Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens, str.— "Brazil, Pohl, Sello.'\ the localities elaborated in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 339.
1876: ".
.
. in campis ad S. Ignacio prov. Minas Geraes: Sello; ad Congo [Corrego] do Jaragua ejusdem provinciae [=Jaragua, s.-centr. Goias], Pohl.^'— Lectotypus (Bameby, I.e., infra): Pohl 1212 = d.l405, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1831; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54852, ISTY! W!; syntypus Sello 322, K (hb. Benth.)!—M. xanthocentra var. subsericea (Bentham) Bameby, Brittonia 37: 152.
1985.
M. stipularis Bongard ex Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 380.1841 .—"Chapada [dos Guimaraes, Mato Grosso, Riedel, commun.] Langsdorff.'"—\Holotypus, Riedel 126/492, K! M. subsericea var. strigosa Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4:552 (=P1. hassler.
2:408).
1904. - "[Paraguay:] pr. Pirebebuy, Dec, [Hassler] n. 6855 .. . pr. Chololo, Dec, n. 6687."—Lectotypus, Hassler 6855, G!; isotypus, NY!; syntypi, 6687, G! NY! P! M. subsericea var. hirsuto-strigosa Chodat & Hassler, 1904, U.cc —"[Paraguay:].
.
. pr. Igatimi, Dec, [Hassler] n. 5630; ... pr flumen Capibary, Dec, n. 5933."—Lectotypus, Hassler 5630, G!; isotypus, NY!; syntypi, 5933, G! NY! M. subsericea var. hirsuto-strigosa fma minor Chodat & Hassler, 1904, U.cc—"[Paraguay:] ... in campis pr. flumen Capibary, Dec, [Hassler] n. 5933a."— Holotypus, G!; isotypus, NY! M. subsericea var. oblonga Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4:553 (=P1. hassler.
2:409).
1904.- "[Paraguay:] pr. Bellavista, Apa, Dec, [Hassler] n. 8072."-Holotypus, G!; isotypi, NY! P! M. loeseneriana Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53 (Mem. 3b): 183, 657.
1906, ex parte (exclus.
21050).
1906, nom. nud. —Specimina authent.: Glaziou 21050a, K! P! M. subsericea sensu Bentham, 1875: 405; 1876: 339; Burkart, 1948: 182,fig.32.
M. stipularis sensu Bentham, 1875: 405, the locality misplaced in Minas Gerais; 1876: 339, a specific distinction between it and the preceding questioned.
Indumentum of foliage variable in length and density, the lfts either green or silvery-pilose dorsally; pinna-rachis of lvs near mid-stem commonly 6-12(-14) cm, or when drought-stressed only 4-6 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.8-4 mm, varying with width of lfts; lfts mostly at least 35-jug., if fewer at least 1.5 mm wide.
In cerrado and young capoeira, commonly on red sandy soils, on the Brazilian Planalto mostly at 500-1200 m but lower s.- and w.-ward, common and variable from centr. Goias s. to interior Sta. Catarina, e. to Sa. do Cabral in centr. Minas Gerais, w. to s.-e. Bolivia, centr. Paraguay, and the lower Parana valley in Corrientes, Argentina; adventive in Guarico, Venezuela.—Fl.
IX-IV (-V), sporadically during the dry months.
Map 62.
Two mutually independent modes of variation contribute to the more conspicuous variation within what is here defined as var. subsericea: quality of pubescence, and width of leaflets, the latter closely related to distance between successive pairs but not to their number nor, consequently, to length of pinnae.
Nomenclaturally typical subsericea has narrow crowded leaflets silvery-silky beneath, whereas M. stipularis is based on a variant in which stipules broader than customary (but not unique) in M. xanthocentra sensu lato coincide with broader, more distant, but equally pilose-silky leaflets.
Bentham early suggested that M. stipularis might represent no more than an extreme form of M. subsericea, and his suspicion is confirmed by the number of intermediate forms now extant in collections.
Moreover, there are parallel series of thinly strigose green plants with broader and narrower leaflets which, if M. stipularis is recognized at any level, command the same attention.
It is worth noting, however, that no one variant of var. subsericea occurs universally through the variety's range and some variants appear, on present evidence, to be relatively localized—for example, plants tmly equivalent in all respects to M. stipularis are known only from southem and eastem Mato Grosso—the overall picture being one of genetic drift and incipient differentiation related to dispersal.
Of the variants described by Chodat & Hassler only var. strigosa is anything out of the ordinary in var. subsericea; it has relatively few and broad leaflets which simulate those of sympatric M. polycarpa var. spegazzinii.
I suspect that var. strigosa and its aculeate analogue var. strigoso-aculeata, herein referred to var. mansii, are hybrid derivatives from a cross between some unarmed form of M. xanthocentra and armed M. polycarpa spegazzinii.
The type of each variety, however, has the ellipsoid capitula and pilosulous flowers of M. xanthocentra sensu lato.
384/IIc.
IVIimosa xanthocentra Martius subsp. subsericea (Bentham) Bameby var. exilis Barneby, var. nov., inter omnes var. subsericea formas statura gracillima humilique, foliomm majomm pinnis 2.5-4 (perpaucis 5 usque) cm 60 50 641 MAP 62.
Planaltine Brazil and adjoining countries.
Range of M. xanthocentra Martius var. subsericea (Bentham) Bameby. longis, foliolisque suis 20-30(-33)-jugis parvulis 4-7 X 1.3 mm usque, necnon capituUs minimis absque filamentis 3.5-4.5(-5) mm diametro praestans.—Brazil.
Distrito Federal: 2 km e. of Lago Paranoa, 1000 m, 26.11.1970 (fl), Irwin (with Fonseca, Souza, Reis dos Santos & Ramos) 266^5.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Like var. subsericea but simultaneously diminished in stature, length of pinnae, number of leaflets, and girth of capitula, the dimensions given in the Latin diagnosis.
In cerrado, 1000 m, known only from the typelocality near Lago do Paranoa in the city of BrasUia, this close to populations of robust, longleaved, thick-capitulate var. subsericea.—¥1.
IIIII(-?).
The var. exilis may be an extreme variant of or mutant from var. subsericea fated to be reabsorbed into sympatric stock, but it is visually so striking as to require notice of some kind.
By providing a name, I hope to draw the attention of botanists at Universidade de Brasilia to a readily accessible problem in genetics and dispersal.
384/IId.
IVIimosa xanthocentra Martius subsp. subsericea (Bentham) Bameby var. miseranda Bameby, var. nov., inter M. xanthocentrae varietates inermes praesertim capituUs minimis absque filaments 2.5-3.5 mm tantum diametientibus, filamentis brevissimis vix 3 mm e corolla exsertis, leguminisque setis albidis 1.5-2.5 mm tantum longis praestans.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso do Sul: along rio Sta. Luzia, mun. Rio Brilhante, 6.
II.1975 (fl, fr), W. R. Anderson (with Hatschbach, Barneby & Gates) 11227.-Holotypus, MBM; isotypi, K, NY, US. Essentially like var. subsericea except for diminished stature, short pinnae only (2-)2.5^ cm, relatively few (26-32-jug.) lfts, diminutive capitula (without filaments 4-8 x 2.5-3.5 mm), short filaments exserted only ± 3 mm, and shortly setose replum of pod.
In disturbed sandy campo near 500 m, known only from the type-locality in mun. Rio Brilhante, s. Mato Grosso do Sul, BrazU.—Fl. (?-)XIIII.
An inconspicuous, weedy little mimosa, technically distinguished from var. subsericea by the characters given above, which together form its distinct facies.
384/III. Mimosa xanthocentra Martius subsp. tremula (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. tremula Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 380.
1841. — Typus sub var. sequente indicatur.
Like subsp. subsericea except for hispid indumentum of stems, dorsal rib of pinna-rachises, and peduncles, the cauline setae widely ascending, horizontal, or declined below middle and thence incurved, the longer ones 1.5-6 mm; petioles except randomly near base of stem less than 1 cm, the upper ones often reduced to pulvinus or almost so; rachis of pinnae (deflected from petiole in most dry specimina) 2-8.5(-9) cm; lfts of longer pinnae (20-)25-37-jug. 384/IIIa.
Mimosa xanthocentra Martius subsp. tremula (Bentham) Bameby var. tremula.
M. tremula Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 380.
1841.-"Brazil, Pc/z/. "
- H o l o t y p u s, Pohl 1477.
K!; isotypus, NY! M. goyazensis Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 380.
1841.-"Prov.
Goyaz, Gardner, n. 3705."
, the locaUty given more exactly by Bentham, 1876: 340: "... ad Serra de Natividade."
—Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1832; isotypi, ^B = F Neg. 7527! BM! G! P! W! M. goyazensis sensu Bentham, 1875: 405, 1876: 340.
Resembling the coarser, larger-lvd variants of var. subsericea except for hispid indumentum of fiilvous-stramineous setae to (1.5-)2-5.5(-6) mm, the lfts at least thinly pilose on upper face; leafstalks of lower (deciduous) lvs 4-12 mm, of upper lvs not over 4 mm, many reduced to pulvinus; rachis of longer pinnae 4.5-8.5(-9) cm, their lfts (23-)25-37-jug., spaced at intervals to 1.5-3 mm; pods ±3 mm wide, the replum hispid with setae to 2.5-5 mm, the valves glabrous to pubemlent or sometimes thinly setulose.
In campo sujo, campo mpestre, and open cerrado, 870-1200 or on Chapada dos Veadeiros to 1550 m, scattered over centr. and s.-e. Goias and Distrito Federal from ± 11°30'S at the typelocality (Natividade) s. along the Tocantins-S. Francisco divide to ± 18°S (near Catalao), w. to Sa. dos Pirineus and disjunctly e. to Sa. do Espinha90 near 17°S in n.-centr. Minas Gerais (Montes Claros).-R. XII-II, fr.
I-?,
the repla long persistent.
Map 63.
The types of M. goyazensis and M. tremula are in my eyes narrowly conspecific, but the names as applied by Bentham in Flora brasiliensis (I Sl6) stand for distinct taxa: M. goyazensis being the equivalent of the present var. tremula, and M. tremula of the present var. tenuis.
In combining the two names, I would have preferred to adopt the epithet goyazensis and synonymize M. tremula, which Bentham misunderstood.
When united at the varietal level, however, a ghostly var. tremula, autonymously generated by var. tenuis Bentham in 1841, takes precedence over any usage of goyazensis that might be proposed at the varietal level.
384/IIIb.
Mimosa xanthocentra Martius subsp. tremula (Bentham) Bameby var. tenuis (Bentham) Bameby, comb. nov. M. tremula var. (/?) tenuis Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 380.
1841.-"Brazil, Sello."
-No typus found at K in 1975-1976, possibly overlooked; if not, perhaps a unicate specimen lost at B.—See comment below.
M. tremula sensu Bentham, 1875: 405 & 1876: 340, max. ex parte, exclus. typo pohliano.
Stems densely foliate, the narrow green pinnae (when dry) all sharply deflexed and reversely imbricate, the stems hispid with spreading-ascending setae to 1.5-5 mm, the lfts glabrous above; MIMOSA XANTHOCENTRA subsp. TREMULA: var. TREMULA # var. TENUIS* MAP 63.
Planaltine Brazil.
Range of M xanthocentra Martius subsp. tremula (Bentham) Bameby. leafstalks not over 3 mm, most reduced to pulvinus or almost so; pinnae of larger lvs 2-4.5 cm, their lfts (20-)22-42-jug., spaced to 0.8-1.4 mm apart along rachis; pod of war. tremula, the valves (so far as known) glabrous, the setae of replum to 3-3.5 mm.
In cerrado and dry campo, ±400-650(-?) m, of remotely bicentric dispersal: s.-w. Minas Gerais (Caldas) and adj. S. Paulo (Mogiguagu, S. Joao da Boa Vista, Farinha Podre, Campos da Bocaina); upper valley of rio das Mortes in s.-e. Mato Grosso (Xavantina and vicinity).—Fl.
XIV. Map 63.
For lack of a type I cannot be absolutely certain that I here use the epithet tenuis correctly.
In Flora brasiliensis Bentham evaluated var. tenuis or, to be more exact, Sello's plant from southem Brazil, as a forma minor tenuior of the species represented by RegneU 1/92 (K! S!) and RegneU III/501* (K! S! US!), the species that he called M. tremula.
The var tenuis described herein is equivalent to M. tremula sensu Bentham when deprived of its type.
This variety is visually striking by virtue of crowded, retrorsely imbricate, very narrow pinnae, hispid stems, and small, ventrally glabrous leaflets, but the individual flower and pod differ not at all from those of M. xanthocentra sensu lato.
It seems possible that the population of var. tenuis in the two, mutually distant districts from which samples are at hand are independently derived, for they are different in minor points: at Xavantina the cauline setae are about 1.5-2 mm long and the pairs of leaflets on longer pinnae are 3 2 ^ 2 ; in Minas Gerais and S. Paulo the setae rise to 2.5-5 mm in length while leaflet-pairs are not over 20-32.
It seems geographically probable that Sello's plant was of the latter sort.
In 1830 Sello took the road from Mogi das Cruces in S. Paulo east to Itajuba in Minas Gerais (cf. Urban, 1906: 110), passing directly through the known southem range of var. tenuis.
I have refrained deliberately from neotypifying var. tenuis, for a duplicate of the type may yet be found among unnumbered Sello collections in some European herbarium.
E(ii.l7).
Series M I M O S A subseries M O R O N G I A N A E Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Morongianae Bameby, subser. nov., inter subser. Pudicas et Hirsutas amphibola et inter illas nexum intimum effbrmans, a priori calyce dimidiato spathiformi, a secunda filamentis inter se liberis distans.—Sp. typica: M. morongii Britton.
Small diffuse or humifuse herbs, either armed at nodes or unarmed; stipules 3-7-nerved; lf-stks 6-30(-50) mm, espiculate; pinnae palmately 2- 3-jug.; lfts 7-13-jug., 3-5-nerved; capitula ellipsoid; calyx dimidiate-spathiform, consisting of one adaxial, setiform-decompound lobe; filaments free or almost so; fruit a 2-4-seeded craspedium.
Spp. 2, of moist campo and submderal habitats in Paraguay e. of rio Paraguai.
The subser. Morongianae is ambiguously (for the systematist awkwardly) poised between subser. Pudicae and subser. Hirsutae.
The typical species, M. morongii, which has aculeate nodes, would fit neatly into Pudicae except that it has the asymmetric calyx of the Hirsutae, while M. centurionis, which is unarmed, would fit as neatly into Hirsutae except that it has the free androecium of the Pudicae.
If the Morongianae were annexed by either Pudicae or Hirsutae, the three subseries would inevitably merge into one vaguely characterized group.
Conspectus of subser. Morongianae Mimosa * Unarmed; lf-stks 2-5 cm; peduncles 6-8 cm.
385. centurionis Bameby ** Armed; lf-stks less than 1.5 cm; peduncles less than 4 cm.
386. morongii Britton Key to species of subser. Morongianae I. Unarmed; lf-stks 20-50 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 2-3.5 cm; longer lfts 6-9 x 2-2.5 mm, (4-)5- nerved from pulvinule, one narrowly intramarginal nerve anterior to midrib and the latter 2-3-branched on each side; peduncles 6-8 cm; capitula without filaments ±7 mm diam.; upland valleys of e.-centr. Paraguay 385.
M. centurionis (p. 644).
1.
Armed at most nodes with one infrapetiolar and sometimes in addition 1-2 infrastipular aculei; lf-stks 6-14 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 1-1.7 cm; longer lfts 4.5-5.5 x 1.2-1.6 mm, 3-nerved dorsally from pulvinule, the midrib unbranched and the other nerves posterior; peduncles 1.5-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments 4.5-5.5 mm diam.; lowlands near Asuncion, Paraguay 386.
M. morongii (p. 645).
385.
Mimosa centurionis Bameby, nom. et stat. nov. M. argillicola subsp. major Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 558.
1910.- "Paraguay: Centurion, fetter feuchter Camp, Fiebrig no. 4007."—Holotypus, G!; isotypi, E! GH! = NY Neg. 11724, K! M! P! W! M. argillicola subsp. major var. intermedia Hassler, op. cit.,
p. 559.
1910.—"Paraguay: Villa Sana . .. Fiebrig no. 4851 [ex parte]."—Holotypus, G! Unarmed, pliantly humifuse perennial herb with mostly simple stems 3.5-9 dm radiating from the crown of a taproot or xylopodium, the stems with lf-stks, palmatipinnate lvs and long vertical axillary peduncles at once minutely pubemlent and softly thinly pilose with fine spreading or subdeclined setae to 1-1.5 mm, the brownish-olivaceous lfts smooth glabrous above, beneath a little paler, prominently venulose and thinly appressed-pilose, setose-ciliate, the long succession of mostly solitary, rarely geminate peduncles developing coevally with the associated If and becoming longer than it, the capitula ellipsoid.
Stipules firm, ascending, lanceolate 2-9 X 1.2-1.7 mm, dorsally pubemlent, setose-ciliolate, striately 5-7-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks ±2-3(-5) cm, at middle 0.4-0.6 mm diam., openly shallow-sulcate ventrally, the dilated rachis 1-2 mm; pinnae 2(-3)-jug., the pulvini contiguous, the distal pair a little longer than the rest, their rachis (1.6-)2.5-3.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2.3-3.3 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 10-13-jug., subdecrescent at or near each end of rachis, the first pair 1.8-2.5 mm distant from linear-attenuate paraphyllidia 0.8-2.5 mm, the blades narrowly oblong or oblong-elUptic from semicordate or obtusangulate base, abmptly apiculate, those near mid-rachis ±6-9 x 2-2.5 mm, 2.8-4.1 times as long as wide, dorsally (4-)5- nerved from pulvinule, the coarse midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2-2.5, 2-3-branched on each side beyond middle, one anterior, very narrowly intramarginal nerve produced nearly to blade apex and the inner posterior one as long, the next posterior one forming near mid-blade a continuous marginal nerve, the outermost posterior one very short.
Peduncles 6-8 cm; capitula without filaments 10-15 x 5.5-8 mm, prior to anthesis moriform but finely hispidulous with emergent bracteal setae; bracts narrowly oblong, abmptly attenuate distally ±2-2.5 x 0.6 mm, beyond middle minutely pubemlent dorsally, 1-nerved, ciliate with fine setulae to ±0.8 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, the lowest small and staminate; calyx spathiform, consisting of a scarious setiform-decompound scale ±0.8 mm on adaxial side of corolla, lacking on side facing the bract; corolla subcylindric 2.7-2.9 mm, the ovate concave, dorsally keeled and pubemlent, scarcely thickened lobes 0.6-0.8 x 0.5 mm; filaments pink, free almost to base, exserted 8-9.5 mm.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) ± 2 5 x 6 mm, 4-seeded, the valves only minutely setulose.
In rich wet campo, at elevations not recorded but perhaps ±300-350 m, known only from e.- centr. Paraguay near lat. 22°30'S, to be sought on n. bank of rio Apa and its tributaries in adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, BrazU.-R. XII-II(-?).
It is not disputed that M. centurionis is related to M. morongii, to which (under the taxonomic synonym M. argillicola) Hassler subordinated it, but it differs in so many details as to deserve specific status.
Lack of aculei, coarser foliage, leaflets mostly 5 (not 3)-nerved, much longer peduncles and fatter capitula contribute to a decidedly different facies.
In unarmed, procumbent stems and in spathiform calyx M. centurionis resembles also M. caaguazuensis, but differs in pinnae exactly two (not mostly three) pairs per leaf, in much smaller leaffets (to 6-9, not 11-32 mm long), in eUipsoid (not globose) capitula, and in free (not monadelphous) stamens.
In addition to Fiebrig's collections cited in the protologue of M argillicola subsp. major I have seen only one later collection, T. Rojas 3045 (M) from a place called San Nicolas, not found on any map available to me.
386.
Mimosa morongii Britton, Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 7:97.
1893 - "Central Paraguay ([T. Morong] 728) .
.
. on the Gran Campo near Luque."
-Holotypus, NY! = NY Neg. 4986.
M. argillicola Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 558.
1910, sens, str.—"Paraguay: Adripaslagunae Ypacaray flor. et fruct. mens. Sept.; Hassler no. I035."-Holotypus, G! = FNeg.
28198; isotypi, NY (2 sheets)! P! M. echinocarpa sensu M. Micheli, Bull. Herb. Boiss.
6(Append.
1): 40 (=P1. hassler.
40).
1898; non Bentham.
Slender or diminutive prostrate herbs with simple or distally few-branched stems radiating from a short caudex and (presumably) a fusiform taproot, weakly armed at some nodes with a fragile stramineous, straight or recurved, infrapetiolar aculeus 0.5-2 mm sometimes accompanied by a pair of smaller infrastipular ones, the subterete stems, lf-stks and peduncles either thinly pilosulous with weak spreading setae to 1-2 mm or only remotely pilosulous with much shorter setulae, often in addition minutely pubemlent, the olivaceous subconcolorous palmatipinnate lvs nearly as long as or a little longer than internodes, the lfts glabrous above, beneath thinly appressed-pilose or strigulose, the margin with discrete filiform ascending cilia 0.3-1.3 mm, the ellipsoid capitula solitary in the axil of coevally expanding lvs, shortly subracemose in early praefloration but soon lateral.
Stipules lance-ovate 1.5-4.5 X 0.7-1.2 mm, prominently 3-5-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 6-25 mm, at middle 0.35-0.5 mm, openly shallowly sulcate ventrally, the rachis only 1-1.5 mm, spicules 0; pinnae 2-3-jug., their pulvini contiguous, the rachis of longest pair 10-27 mm, that of proximal pairs a little shorter, the interfoliolar segments 1-1.7 mm; lfts of distal pair of pinnae (7-)8-10- jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis, the blades lance-oblong from semicordate base, abmptly apiculate, those near mid-rachis ±4.5- 6 X 1.2-1.8 mm, 2.8-4 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath prominulously 3-nerved from pulvinule, the unbranched midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the inner posterior nerve produced almost to blade apex, the outer one much shorter.
Peduncles 1.5-3.5 cmcapitula without filaments 7-12 x 4.5-5.5 mm, ±1.5-2 times as long as diam., prior to anthesis moriform but sometimes weakly hispidulous with emergent bracteal setae, the obovoid fl-buds minutely pubemlent; bracts narrowly oblong-oblanceolate 1-1.6 X 0.4 mm, dorsally glabrous 1-nerved, the cilia toward apex 0.4-1 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx membrano-paleaceous spathiform 0.7-0.9 mm, reduced to a scale on side of fl opposed to its bract, setiform-decompound to within 0.2-0.45 mm of base; corolla narrowly funnelfbrm 2-2.4 mm, the membranous 1 -nerved, shallowly concave lobes 0.65-0.8 x 0.5-0.7 mm, scarcely thickened at apex; filaments lilac-pink, free almost to base, exserted 7-8 mm.
Pods (few seen) ±3-6(-?) per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately narrow-oblong 11-17 x 4 mm, 2-4- seeded, the replum 0.5-0.6 mm wide, cuspidate at apex, strigulose on dorsal and lateral ribs with setulae less than 1 mm, the brown papery valves coUiculate over each seed, hispidulous with grossly dilated comma-shaped setulae, breaking when ripe into free-falling indehiscent articles 3.5-4.5 mm long; seeds (few seen) rhombic-lentiform 3.5 x 2.7 mm, the smooth testa dull brown.
In hard-packed clay soils at ± 150 m, so far as known localized in the valley of rio Paraguai immediately to the n. and e. of Asuncion, Paraguay (Trinidad; Luque; Lago Ypacaray).—Fl.
IV-VI, VIII-X(-?), perhaps indefinitely through the year.
An inconspicuous Uttle mimosa, differing from starveling forms of M. pudica principally in the asymmetrically paleaceous calyx.
Like M. pudica the plants are characteristically armed at nodes with 1-3 aculei, but I have seen one unarmed plant (Quinta Fiebrig, 1941, Chodat s. n., ex parte, G) which suggests relationship to the also Paraguayan M. lupinoides.
The latter, however, has erect stems, much larger leaves and leaflets, and larger globose capitula.
Other species technically similar, such as M. hirsutissima or M. digitata, have symmetrically paleaceous calyx and either much larger or much more numerous leaflets.
E(ii.l8).
Series MIMOSA subseries BIPENNATULAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Bipennatulae Bameby, subser. nov., nexum inter subser. Polycephalas et Pudicas inermes conjugato-pinnatas constituens, a Polycephalis imprimis androecii filamentis inter se ipsa basi tantum coadunatis, a Pudicis foliolis marginatis diversae, species duae inter se habitu mpestri fmticuloso, foliolis numerosis minimis constipato-imbricatis, capitulisque minuscuUs congruae, his signis simul ab affinibus abstantes.—Sp. typica: M. bipennatula Bameby.
Unarmed microphyllidious shrublets with slender defoliate tmnks, either erect or prostrate: stipules either 1- or striately 5-7-nerved; lf-stks 1-3.5 mm, espiculate;/7/««<2^conjugate, narrowly ascending on firm pulvini; lfts 30-85-jug., to 3-4.5 mm, finely continuously marginate, 1 -nerved; capitula axillary, ovoid-obovoid; calyx paleaceous-pappiform; corolla-lobes antrorsely pubemlent; filaments very shortly or obscurely connate below the ovary; fruit a 3-4-seeded craspedium.
Spp. 2, of sandstone outcrops, highly localized on either side of the upper rio Parana, one in s. Mato Grosso, Brazil, the other in Santa Cmz, Bolivia.
The two species of Bipennatulae, which are alike in specialized life-form and rupestral habitat, form a nexus between subser. Pudicae and subser. Polycephalae.
They resemble microphyllidious Polycephalae such as M. pyrenea and M. papposa in their numerous small, densely imbricate and continuously marginate leaffets, but differ in almost free filaments.
They marginally approach subser. Pudicae through unarmed and conjugate-pinnate M. xanthocentra subsp. subsericea, of which they have the calyx and androecium, but differ in continuously marginate leaflets, fruticulose growth-habit, and insensitive pulvini at base of leaf-stalk and pinnae.
They bear only distant resemblance to the core of subser. Pudicae, which is characteristically armed and has more than one pair of pinnae per leaf.
Conspectus of subser. Bipennatulae Mimosa 387. bipennatula Bameby 388. jacobita Bameby 1mm.
2mm.
1mm. imcr^^L bupenrveitivisi FIG. 22.
Mimosa bipennatula Bameby (A-E) and M. jacobita Bameby (F-I).
A. Flowering stem.
B. Leaves.
C. Segment of pinna-rachis + imbricate leaflets.
D. Leaflet, dorsal view + margin enlarged.
E. Bract + flower.
F. Flowering branchlet.
G. Leaf H. Leaflet, dorsal view + margin enlarged.
I. Rower.
J. Pod. (A-E from Hatschbach 37663; F-I from Daly 2174.) Key to species of subser. Bipennatulae 1.
Erect shrublets, the defoliate older branches strict and stiff; stipules striately 5-7-nerved; lfts of longer pinnae 70-85-jug.; s.-centr. Mato Grosso, Brazil 387.
M. bipennatula (p. 647).
1.
Procumbent shrublets, the defoliate old stems crooked and wiry; stipules 1-nerved; lfts of longer pinnae 30-48-jug.; Sta. Cmz, Bolivia 388.
M. jacobita (p. 648).
387.
Mimosa bipennatula Bameby, sp. nov., fmticulosa erecta infeme defoliata, stipulis striatim 5-7-nerviis, pinnis 1-jugis erectis, foliolis tenui-marginatis 70-85-jugis usque minimis angustissimis constipato-imbricatis, capituUs parvis (absque filamentis ± 3 mm diam.) brevipedunculatis, filamentis basi brevissime coadunatis praestans, ab affini M.jacobita caulibus erectis, stipulis nervosis, foliolis subduplo numerosioribus et calyce subdimidio breviori abstans.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso: rock outcrops at edge of Chapada dos Guimaraes near Mata Fria, 16.
XI. 1975 (fl), G. Hatschbach i766i.-Holotypus, NY.
Fig.
22A-E. Slender erect unarmed shrublet ±1 m, with spindling defoliate tmnk branched distally, the subvertical microphyllidious lvs crowded toward tip of young branchlets, the homotinous stems and lf-stks strigose with dorsally flattened. closely appressed smooth setae mostly 0.5-1.5 mm (but some flageUately attenuate to 3 mm), the extremely narrow and densely imbricate lfts finely pallid-marginate and setose-ciliate but otherwise glabrous, the small, plumply ovoid capitula solitary in a few distal If-axils, immersed in foliage.
Stipules erect, firm lanceolate ±3-4 X 0.8 mm, facially glabrous, setose-ciliolate, striately 5-7-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including hard but scarcely swollen pulvinus 2.5- 3.5 mm, near middle 0.5-0.6 mm diam.; pinnae I-jug., erect from narrowly ascending lf-stk, the rachis 3>-^ cm, the interfoliolar segments ±0.3 mm; lfts 70-85-jug., subcontiguously stacked face-to-face in narrowly ascending files, subdecrescent at each end of rachis, all narrowly linear acute, those near mid-rachis 3.5-4.5 x 0.3-0.4 mm, 10-11 times as long as wide, the blades veinless above, beneath finely centrically 1-nerved.
Peduncles 4-5 mm; capitula without filaments ±3 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts narrowly elliptic cymbiform ± I x 0.5 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, the lower ones staminate; calyx paleaceous 0.6-0.7 mm, the lacerately decompound lobes united into a tube ±0.2 mm, extemally glabrous; corolla turbinate 4-angulate 1.6 mm, the membranous tube glabrous, the cymbiform, distally subcaUous lobes 0.6-0.4 mm, setulose on either side of the glabrous keel; filaments pink, obscurely monadelphous at very base, exserted ±6 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous; ovules 4.
Pods 1-few per capitulum, sessile, in profile Unear-oblong, including terminal cusp ±23 x 3.5 mm, 3-4-seeded, the slender replum undulately constricted, strigose with forwardly subappressed setae 2-2.5 mm, the valves glabrous, breaking up into articles 4.5-5 mm long; ripe seeds unknown.
On sandstone outcrops near 600-650 m, known only from Chapada dos Guimaraes (Mata Fria; Buriti) n.-e. of Cuiaba, Mato Grosso, Brazil.— n .
XI-? Mimosa bipennatula might be visualized as a decidedly fmticose yet very slender, short-leaved form of the common M. xanthocentra var. subsericea, but may be distinguished by the elegantly striate stipules, the short pinnae, and the continuously marginate leaflets.
The forms of var. subsericea known to occur on Chapada dos Guimaraes have, in addition, much larger leaflets.
The close affinity of M. bipennatula is with M. jacobita, found in simUar mpestral habitat at the westem edge of the Parana basin in Bolivia.
388.
Mimosa jacobita Bameby, sp. nov., ab affini M. bipennatula, caulibus tam annotinis quam vetustis defoliatis lignescentibus foliolisque angustis confertis simillima, caulibus prostratis contortis (nec virgatis rectis), stipulis setiformibus, foliolis ipsis 28-48 (nec 70-85)- jugis usque, necnon calyce duplo majori 1.3- 1.9 (nec 0.6-0.7) mm longo manifeste diversa; a M. xanthocentra subsp. subsericea, cui fforum forma accedit, habitu fmticuloso prostrato, stipulis 1-nerviis 0.2-0.4 (nec 3-7-nerviis 0.5-1.5) mm latis, foliolisque minimis 0.3-0.6 (nec 0.7-1.5) mm latis secus rachin 1.6-2.8 (nec 2.5-12) cm longam subcontigue confertis distantior.—Bolivia.
Santa Cmz: Prov. Chiquitos, Serrania de Santiago, s. slope, 5-10 km e. of Santiago de Chiquitos, 800-950 m, 20.
VII.1983 (fl, fr), D. Daly 2174.-holotypus, NY; isotypi, G, K, LE, LPB, P, US. Fig.
22F-I. Xeromorphic unarmed microphyllidious shrublet, the prostrate defoliate older branches crooked wiry blackish, the homotinous ones assurgent, densely leafy, these and lf-axes densely strigulose with appressed, tapering smooth setae to l-2(-2.5) mm, the very narrow and closely imbricate olivaceous lfts glabrous above, strigose beneath, finely continuously callous-marginate and appressed-ciliate, the small obovoid-ellipsoid capitula either solitary or geminate, shortpedunculate in the axil of a few distal lvs and well surpassed by them.
Stipules stiflly erect, linear-setiform 1.5-4.5 X 0.2-0.4 mm, livid-castaneous and either glabrous or microscopically pubemlent dorsally, 1-nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks including hard, little-swollen pulvinus (1-)1.5-3 X 0.4-0.6 mm; pinnae 1-jug., strictly ascending, the rachis 16-28 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.5 mm; lfts (28-)30-48-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.4- 1 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all in outline narrowly linear from obliquely tmncate base, acute or subacute, those near midrachis (2.5-)3-4.5 X 0.3-0.6 mm, ±6-9 times as long as wide, all smooth veinless above, beneath weakly subcentrically 1-nerved.
Peduncles 5-8 mm; capitula without filaments 6-7 x 3.5- 4 mm, prior to anthesis silky-hispidulous; bracts linear-elliptic 0.8-1.5 x 0.3-0.4 mm, dorsally thinly strigulose, ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, many lower ones staminate; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 1.3-1.9 mm, the lobes deeply setaceous-decompound; corolla membranous, narrowly turbinate 4-angulate 1.6-2.3 mm, the concave lobes 0.5-0.8 x 0.3-0.4 mm, delicately keeled dorsally and thinly pilosulous near margin; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.3- 0.5 below the ovary, exserted 4.5-7.5 mm.
Pods 1(-?) per capitulum, sessile, narrowly oblong ±20 X 4.5-5 mm, 4-seeded, the undulately constricted replum ±0.4 mm wide, strigose-hispidulous overall with ascending pallid-based setae to 1.5- 2 mm, the papery bmnnescent valves retrostrigulose and often also minutely pubemlent, breaking up when ripe into low-biconvex free-falling articles 4.5-5 mm long; seeds not seen.
Locally plentiful on sandstone outcrops, 800- 950 m, s. slope of Serrania de Santiago, near 18°25'S, 59°W, in Santa Cmz, Bolivia.-H. VI-? This little crooked shmblet has foliage of the year crowded at the ends of brittle leafless branchlets and is in consequence very different in facies from the virgate, functionally herbaceous, equably foliate M. xanthocentra var. subsericea, of which it has the technical fforal and fmiting characters.
In ecology and in extremely narrow, marginate leaffets stacked contiguously along the pinna-rachis like the barbs of a bird's feather it resembles M. bipennatula, known only from another residual rock-mass far distant to the northeast in southem Mato Grosso.
The latter has erect tmnks, leaflets nearly twice as many per pinna, 5-7 (not l)-nerved stipules, and a calyx only half as long. E(iL19) Series MIMOSA subseries AFFINES Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Affines Bameby, stat. et nom. nov. M. subgen.
Astatandra B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 33: 307.
1898.—Sp. typica: M. tequilana S. V^atson.—Mimosa XXXIII.
Tequilanae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 146, in clave.
1928.
Monocarpic herbs, armed at and sometimes between nodes or unarmed; indumentum of plain setae sometimes mixed with pubemlence; stipules 2-7-nerved; petioles 1.5-3 cm, espiculate; pinnae conjugate, the lfts 2-13-jug., when 2-jugate the lvs assuming the form prevalent in subser. Mimosa, the larger lfts 8-35 mm and 3- 5-nerved, all discontinuously setose-ciliate; inflorescence of axiUary, short-pedunculate, ± 12- 25-flowered capitula, the fls all ascending from the receptacle;flscommonly dimorphic, the lower ones staminate and sometimes with more than four stamens (but seldom regularly displostemonous); calyx 0.1-0.3 mm, glabrous or minutely ciliolate; filaments free;fruit a 1-4-seeded craspedium.
Spp. 4, two of disturbed woodland and thomscrub in s.-w. and s. Mexico and Belize, one of s.-w. coastal Ecuador, and one disjunct in Ceara, Brazil.
The subseries Affines is a highly specialized group, notable for monocarpic duration and for small capitula consisting of relatively few flowers ascending from the receptacular axis.
The flowers are essentially those of ser. Modestae, which are directly connected by subser. Affines to the core of ser. Mimosa, but the leaf-stalks lack contractile tissue at insertion of the pinnae.
The first two species of the subseries, M. affinis and M. disperma, resemble seedling plants of potentially perennial-fmtescent M. pudica, but differ in the attitude of the fforets and consequently in aspect of the capitulum.
McVaugh (1987: 222) has pointed out the close affinity between M. affinis and M. tequilana; but the specimens (Feddema 902, MICH!) that have four pairs of leaffets per pinna referred to M. tequilana are in reality M. skinneri.
So far as known, every leaf of genuine M. tequilana has exactly two pairs of leaflets per pinna.
This leaf-formula inevitably suggests relationship to subser. Mimosa, but is probably independently derived in M. tequilana.
Heteromorphic flowers, the upper ones of a capitulum bisexual and tetrandrous, some lower ones with gynoecium vestigial or lacking and more than four, sometimes eight stamens, appear inconstantly within ser. Affines.
Their relative frequency needs investigation in the field.
The phenomenon is known also in ser. Mimosa subser. Pedunculosae (M. flagellaris) and is likely to appear elsewhere.
The subgenus Astatandra, based on this feature alone, is here (following McVaugh, 1987, I.e.) devaluated to subserial status.
Conspectus of subser. Affines Mimosa * Lfts 8-13-jug., oblong, at least 3 times as long as wide; lowland tropical Mexico to Belize; Ecuador.
389. affinis B. L. Robinson 390. disperma Bameby ** Lfts precisely 2-jug., obovate, not over twice as long as wide; s.-w. Mexico; n.-e. Brazil.
391. tequilana S. Watson 392. niomarlei A. Fernandes Key to species of subser. Affines 1.
Lfts of lvs at and above mid-stem 8-13-jug., narrowly oblong, the largest 8-15 x 3-4 mm, ±3-4 times as long as wide.
2.
Stems armed at nodes with 2 infrastipular aculei and randomly on some intemodes; interfloral bracts linear, setose-ciliate; pod hispidulous on replum with setulae to ± 1 mm, the valves glabrous or puberulent; s. Mexico and Belize 389.
M. affinis (p. 650).
2.
Stems unarmed; interfloral bracts ovate, less than 1 mm, and minutely ciliolate; pod hispid alike on replum and valves with stramineous setae up to 2-3 mm; s.-w. Ecuador 390.
M. disperma (p. 650).
1.
Lfts of all lvs 2-jug., in outline obliquely obovate, the larger ones 15-35 x 10-20 mm, less than twice as long as wide.
3.
Lfts all strigose dorsally; cilia widely ascending from rim of lfts; lowerflsof each capitulum staminate, the fertile ones (and consequently the pods) less than 10; s.-w. Mexico. ... 391.
M. tequilana (p. 651).
3.
Only the lower pair of lfts dorsally strigose; cilia appressed to rim of lfts; all fls of capitulum perfect, giving rise to a dense cluster of pods; n.-e. Brazil (Ceara) 392.
M. niomarlei (p. 652).
389.
Mimosa affinis B. L. Robinson, Bot. Gaz. (CrawfordsviUe) 16: 341.
1891.-".. . in grassy land among cocoanut trees, Mazatlan [Sinaloa, Mexico] and vicinity, January, 1889 (\W.
G. Wright] n. 1218 and 1285)."-Syntypi, GH! M. mazatlana M. E. Jones, Preprinted from Contr. W. Bot. 18: 40.
1933. nom. illeg.-"No.
22451.
Mazatlan, Mex. Nov. 20 1928 . .. collected there [actually near Tepic, Nayarit] by Mrs Mexia.
.
. ."—Holotypus (Morton, Contr. U.S. NaU.
Herb. 29(2): 99.1945), POM 191879 (not seen).—Non M. mazatlana M. E. Jones, 1929.
M. affinis sensu McVaugh, 1987: 201.
Diffuse monocarpic herbs, armed at (and randomly between) nodes, the stems hispid with erect setae to ±1.5-2 mm, the lfts glabrous above, beneath glabrous, minutely puberulent or a few proximal ones also strigose.
Stipules 5-7-nerved.
Leaf-formula i/8-12, the lf-stks 1.5-3 cm, espiculate, the pinna-rachises 1.5-3.5 cm; lfts oblong ±8-12 X 2-4 mm.
Capitula less than 20-fld, at anthesis ±3 mm diam.; bracts linear, setose-ciliate, persistent;y7(9W^r5 with minute glabrous calyces; corolla ±2 mm; filaments exserted ±3 mm.
Pods to 10 per capitulum, subsessile, in profile narrowly oblong 10-16 x 4.5-5 mm, abruptly cuspidate, the slender replum hispidulous with weak recurved setulae less than 1 mm, the valves either glabrous or puberulent.
In open grassy places and disturbed brushwoodland, from sea-level to ±950 m in the oak belt, scattered around the Pacific lowlands and in the Balsas depression of Mexico from Sinaloa to Guerrero e. to Mexico and Morelos, s.-e. to Oaxaca; Belize (fide R. Grether).—Fl.
VII-I. This species has been mistaken (as by Isely, 1971: 420) for seedling, conjugate-pinnate M. pudica, but is instantly recognizable by the tiny narrow capitula of ascending flowers.
390.
Mimosa disperma Bameby, sp. nov., M. affini proxime consanguinea, ab ea nec foliis nec flosculis diversa, sed inermis (nec ad nodos aculeis geminis infrastipularibus armata), bracteis interfloralibus minimis minute ciliolatis (nec flosculum aequantibus et margine setosis), et praesertim legumine setis erectis debilibus 2-3 mm usque longis ubique hispido (nec replo solo hispidulo) abstans.—Ecuador.
Guayas: Mun.
Guayaquil, Urdero (cerro) Sexta y Datiles, drenaje del Estero Salado, 4.
IV.1964 (fl, fr), Alicia A. del Delgado 24.- Holotypus, MO 2145895 = NY Neg. 72077.
Unarmed monocarpic herb with terete fewbranched trailing stem 5.5(-?) dm, this with lfstks and peduncles thinly hispid with erect or widely ascending setae to 1-1.5 mm, nowhere either puberulent or glandular, the foliage olivaceous subconcolorous, the lfts all glabrous above and distantly appressed-setose-ciliate, some proximal ones of each pinna thinly strigose dorsally, the very small ovoid capitula solitary in a long succession of If-axils, on peduncle shorter than the subtending petiole.
Stipules erect herbaceous lanceolate 2-4.5 x 0.8-1.2 mm, glabrous and prominently 2-3-nerved dorsally, thinly setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 15- 25 X 0.4-0.5 mm, the ventral groove narrow, spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 3-5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2.5-4.5 mm; lfts (8-)9-l 3-jug., except for smaller proximal ones subequilong, the first pair 0.5-1.3 mm distant from erect subulate green paraphyllidia 0.5-0.8 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from broadly shortly auriculate base, minutely deltate-apiculate, those near mid-rachis 8.5-15 x 3-4 mm, 3.7-4.2 times as long as wide, all 3-5-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric beyond midblade and pinnately 3-5-branched on each side, the anterior nerve (when present) submarginal, the inner posterior one expiring above midblade, the outer posterior ones progressively shorter, the venation almost imperceptible above, finely prominulous and pallid beneath.
Peduncles l-l A mm, at anthesis filiform, thickened in fruit; capitula ± 12-15-fld, prior to anthesis moriform, the fls all ascending from receptacle, the whole without filaments ±3 mm diam.; bracts ovate ±0.7-0.5 mm, minutely ciliolate, glabrous dorsally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, glabrous throughout, all bisexual; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.3 mm, the rim angulate but scarcely lobed; corolla narrowly vase-shaped, bluntly 4-angulate 1.5-1.8 mm, the oblong, apically hooded 1-nerved lobes ±0.8 x 0.4 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 2-2.5 mm; anthers 0.25 mm diam. Pods several per capitulum, sessile, in profile either broadly oblong and 2(-3)-seeded or orbicular 1-seeded, 5-10 x 5- 6.5 mm, 1-1.5 times as long as wide, the replum 0.25 mm wide, at broadly obtuse apex produced into an erect cusp 1.3-2 mm, the papery brunnescent valves low-convex over each seed, the replum and valves alike hispid overaU with erect weak, stramineous brown-tipped setae to 2-3 mm, the valves in addition minutely puberulent and when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles ±3-4.5 mm long; seeds in profile ±3 x 2.5 mm, strongly compressed, the testa dull brown.
In unreported habitat, but to be expected in grassy or weedy places, perhaps seasonally inundated, known only from the type-locality near sea-level in Guayas, Ecuador.—Fl. (?-)III-V(-?).
Mimosa disperma is clearly and closely related to Mexican M. affinis, from which it differs not at all in leaf or individual ffowers, but appears nevertheless distinct in lack of aculei, in small ovate, minutely ciliolate interfloral bracts, and in pod hispid overall with long stramineous setae.
In the event that these characters prove variable, as is not unlikely, M. disperma may turn out to be a vicariant variety of M. affinis, from which it appears at present to be detached by a distance of at least 2000 km and 19 degrees of longitude.
391.
Mimosa tequilana S. Watson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 22: 409.
1887.-"Tequila [Jalisco, Mexico], in ravines among grasses. i(E. Palmer] 378)."-Holotypus, GH!; isotypi, NY! US! M. in[a]equalis M. E. Jones, Preprinted from Contr. W. Bot. 18:39.
1933, nom. illeg.-"No.
27267.
Guadalajara [Jalisco], Mex. Nov 26, 1930."—Holotypus (Morton, Contr. U.S. NaU.
Herb. 29(2): 98.
1945), POM 191880 (not seen).—Non M. inaequalis Poiret, 1810.
M. tequilana sensu McVaugh, 1987: 222.
Macrophyllidious monocarpic herbs 2-9 dm or taller, thinly or rather densely hispid with yellowish setae to 2-2.5 mm and armed on internodes with 2-3(4), (one infrapetiolar, the rest infrastipular), gently recurved aculei ±2-3 mm, otherwise subglabrous except for dorsally strigose lfts, the small capitula solitary in a succession of If-axils.
Stipules linear-lanceolate 5-9.5 mm, 3-nerved, setose-cUiate.
Leaf-stalks 2-7 cm, shallowly widely sulcate ventrally, espiculate; pinnae conjugate at tip of lf-stk, the rachis less than 1 cm; lfts 2-jug., the inner of each proximal pair much smaller than the rest, the distal pair obovate, obtuse but apiculate 15-35 x 10-20 mm, palmately 3-nerved from pulvinus, all discontinuously ciliate with ascending setae free through ±1-2 mm.
Capitula 12-25-fld, at anthesis 2.5^ mm diam., theflsaU ascending; bracts linear 1-nerved, setose-ciUolate; flowers with subtruncate, ±0.1 mm calyces; corollas either glabrous or minutely puberulent distally, some lower ones of some plants staminate and 7-10- androus, 1.6-1.8 mm long, the upper (or in some capitula all) bisexual 4-merous 4-androus and 2- 2.4 mm; filaments free, exserted 2.5-3.5 mm.
Pods ± 3-8 per capitulum, sessUe, in profile narrowly oblong, (1-)2-4-seeded, in profile, excluding terminal cusp, (5.5-) 11-19 x 5-6 mm, the slender replum and papery valves alike hispid with tapering setae to 4-5.5 mm.
In open deciduous woodland and on steep barranca slopes, becoming weedy in pastures, 900- 1700 m, apparently endemic to the trench of the lower rio Santiago valley downstream from Guadalajara in Jalisco and Nayarit, Mexico.—Fl.
IX onward, depending on available moisture.
Except for the diminutive capitula of ascending flowers, in which it agrees with M. affinis, this species resembles immature forms of South American M. (subser. Mimosa) debilis.
392.
Mimosa niomarlei A. Fernandes, Anais Soc. Bot. BrasU Congr.
Nac. Bot. 19 (Fortaleza): 93.
1968.—"Habitat in Serra Meruoca—Ceara, Brasil, loco Santo Antonio.
Specimina lecta ab A. Fernandes-[EAC] n° 2046 de 6-1-1961 (Holotypus) et n° 2189 de 6-VI-1962 (Paratypus)."—Not seen.
Diffuse or subscandent herbs of unknown potential duration, with terete brown stems at once puberulent and hispid with rusty setae to 1.5-2 mm, armed at and below nodes with a pair of immediately infrastipular aculei and one downwardly displaced infrapetiolar one, these all recurved and to ±2 mm long, the ample lfts glabrous except for strigose hypophyllum of the smaller proximal pair and for discontinuously appressed-setose-ciliate margin, the small capitula solitary in a long succession of If-axils on peduncle much shorter than the subtending lfstk.
Stipules linear-lanceolate ±5-10 mm, strongly 3-nerved, hispid-cUiate, persistent.
Leafstalks slender 3-6 cm, shallowly widely sulcate ventrally; pinnae 2-jug., the rachis to ± 1 cm, the linear-lanceolate paraphyllidia 2-4 mm; lfts 2-jug., the smaller proximal pair ovate unequal, the distal pair obliquely obovate, shortly broadly acuminulate, to 2-3.5 x 1.2-2 cm, palmately nerved.
Peduncles 1-2 cm; capitula ± 16-fld, the 4-merous 4-androus ffs all ascending and all bisexual; bracts subsetiform ±1.5 mm; flowers with subtruncate, 0.2 mm calyces; corolla narrowly trumpet-shaped 1.6-2 mm, glabrous, the ovate cymbiform, dorsally carinate lobes 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments pink, exserted 2 mm.
Pods radiating in a dense cluster, narrowly oblong ±10-19 x 4.5- 5 mm, 2-3(-4)-seeded, the shallowly undulate replum ±0.25 mm wide, hispid on back and sides with straight erect tapering setae to 4 mm, the papery valves likewise thinly setose but otherwise glabrous, when ripe breaking up into freefalling, individually dehiscent articles 4-6 mm long; seeds broadly obovate in profile ±3 x 2.5 mm, the testa smooth fuscous.
In disturbed brush-woodland, apparently local in w. Ceara, BrazU, between 3°25' and 6°30'S (Sa.
Meruoca s. to Parambu).—Fl. indefinite.—M<3//- ca de boi.
I am acquainted with M. niomarlei only through specimens (Nunes, EAC 11431) kindly provided by its describer.
Prof. Fernandes.
In the protologue it was compared with M. rixosa of subser. Mimosa, but the few-flowered capitula of small ascending flowers are characteristic of subser. Affines and the plant as a whole closely resembles at nearly all points the Mexican M. tequilana.
In addition to the weak differential characters noted in the key to the subseries, M. niomarlei appears to be a somewhat taller plant, at first sight suggesting a broad-leaffet form of M. debilis.
Despite the immense distance between their ranges, I am not altogether confident that M. tequilana and M. niomarlei are specifically distinct.
In the protologue the epithet is spelled, at the beginning of the description, nomarlei, but elsewhere, as on herbarium labels provided by Prof. Fernandes, as niomarlei, adopted herein.
E(ii.20).
Series MIMOSA subseries SIMPLICISSIMAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Simplicissimae Bameby, subser. nov. monotypica, radice annua, caule simplici virgato ad vel infra nodes armato, stipulis caducis, capituUs brevipedibus solitariis axillaribus, necnon leguminibus cujusque capituli numerosis incurvis, sphaeram densam efformantibus praestans; verosimiliter subser. Pudicis affinis, ab ipsius M. pudicae formis conjugato-pinnatis habitu et duratione, stipulis ac legumine valde diversa, distantius ut videtur a M. schrankioide subseriei Castarum habitu toto, aculeis parcis, legumine angustiori incurvo recedens.—Sp. unica: M. simplicissima Bameby.
Erect monocarpic herbs with simple stem hispid with yellowish setae, puberulent, and armed at all and below some nodes with scattered aculei, the lfts strigose at least beneath; stipules 1-nerved, caducous; petioles 1.5-2.5 cm, espiculate; lfts 11-14-jug., 4-nerved, the longest 10- 13 mm; capitula solitary globose, short-pedunculate in a succession of If-axils; calyx minute, ciliolate; corolla glabrous; filaments obscurely united only below the ovary; pods many, incurved into a spherical head, 3-4-seeded, densely hispid along the slender replum, craspedially dehiscent.
Sp.
1, of lowland savanna (llano) in e. Colombia and perhaps n.-e. Bolivia.
The syndrome of simple virgate stem arising from an annual root, deciduous 1-nerved stipules, conjugate pinnae, a minute, weakly ciliolate calyx, and numerous craspedia of each fertile capitulum incurved into a bristly ball effectively excludes M. simplicissima from any group hitherto formulated within ser. Mimosa.
Its leaves are most nearly comparable with those of conjugate-pinnate forms of M. pudica var. unijuga or of M. schrankioides, but it differs from both in duration of the root, in deciduous stipules, and in incurved pod, and further from M. schrankioides in armament of the stem.
From the annual but diffiisely branched and thus habitally different subser. Affines it differs in the very numerous ffowers packed into a globose head, not relatively few and all ascending from the receptacle.
Rare forms of Af. hirsutissima in which hispid stems coincide with one pinna-pair in all leaves differ from M. simplicissima in elongate peduncles arising from diffuse stems and woody root, dorsally venulose leaffets, and a paleaceous calyx.
In all these more or less closely interrelated mimosas the pods, whether few or many to the capitulum, are straight, when many radiating from the receptacle and not incurved on one another into a hispid ball.
393.
Mimosa simplicissima Bameby, sp. nov., signis supra sub subserie eponyma indicatis ab affinibus facile distinguenda.—Colombia.
Intendencia del Meta: El Mico airstrip, last savanna before rio Guejar, grassland, 450 m, 6.
XI.1949 (ff), Philipson, Idrobo & Fernandez 75^7.-Holotypus, BM = NY Neg. 12309.- Paratypus, ibid.,
eadem die (fr), 1318, BM = NY Neg. 12310.—'No duplicates could be found at COL in 1988.
Virgately erect monocarpic herb ±9 dm tall with simple, distantly foUate stem armed at nodes with 2 and on intemodes (3.5-7 cm long) with 2-4 recurved stramineous aculei 2-3.5 mm, the stem and lf-axes hispid throughout with widely spreading or perpendicular, smooth stramineous setae to 2-3.5 mm and in addition remotely puberulent, the sensitive bright green lvs concolorous, the lfts either thinly puberulent and thinly appressed-setose on both faces or simply puberulent above, discontinuously appressed-setoseciliate, the small globose capitula solitary in the axil of expanding lvs on peduncle shorter than associated If.
Stipules erect herbaceous, narrowly lance-attenuate 4-6 x 0.4-0.8 mm, thinly hispid dorsally and hispid-ciliate, 1-nerved toward apex, early deciduous.
Leaf-stalks including livid (sensitive) pulvinus ±1.5-2.5 cm, at middle 0.4-0.7 mm diam., espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 2-4.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 2-3 mm; lfts 11-14-jug., abruptly decrescent proximally, the smaUfirstpair 0.5-1.1 mm distant from lancesubulate paraphyllidia 0.7-1.2 mm, the blades broad-linear from broadly obtusely auriculate base, deltately apiculate, those near mid-rachis ±10-13 X 2.5-3.3 mm, 4^.3 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath finely 4-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib faintly 2- 3-branched on each side, the inner posterior nerve expiring near or below mid-blade, the rest short and weak.
Peduncles ± 5-8 mm; capitula without filaments 5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-oblanceolate ±2 x 0.3 mm, the blade finely setose-ciliate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus glabrous, almost all fertile; calyx scarcely 0.2 mm, glabrous extemally, the rim with a few cilia to ±0.7 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.7 mm, the oblong concave, internally purplish, extemally paUid, strongly carinate lobes ±0.7 X 0.4 mm; filaments lilac-pink, shortly united around the stipe of the thinly pilosulous ovary, exserted ±4 mm; style filiform, much shorter than the filaments.
Pods very numerous per capitulum, incurved on one another into a dense spherical cluster, all sessile, in profile crescentically oblong 11-15 x 4-5 mm, abmptly cuspidate by the style-base, 3-4-seeded, the scarcely constricted replum ±0.4 mm wide, densely hispid along dorsal and lateral ribs with lustrous pallid tapering setae to 5 mm long, the valves glabrous except for a few setulae immediately over each seed, when ripe breaking up into free-falling articles 3.5-4 mm long. In savanna, 450 m, known certainly only from the type-locality near rio Guejar in s.-w. Meta, and from llanos of El Yopal in Boyaca, Colombia; truncated fruiting specimens from the Guapore valley in n.-e. Bolivia (Magdalena, Krapovickas 34760, NY) may be conspecific—Fl.
XII(-?).
E(iL21).
Series MIMOSA subseries POLYCEPHALAE (Bentham) Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Polycephalae (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. ser. Polycephalae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 373.
1841. —Sp. typica: M. polycephala Bentham.—M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Meticulosae "^Polycephalae Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 401 (''Polycephala'').
1875.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Meticulosae *Glaucae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 375.
I841.-Sp. lectotypica: M. pohlii Bentham = M. calocephala var. pohlii (Bentham) Bameby.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Meticulosae **Marginatae Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30:404.
1875.— Sp. lectotypica: M. calocephala Martius.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Meticulosae **[unnamed] Bentham, 1875: 402 (M. petiolaris).
Unarmed, either macroor microphyllidious shrubs and subshrubs, including infforescence 0.5- 24(-30) dm tall, commonly with few erect-ascending virgate stems arising anew each year from rootstock or xylopodium, rarely persisting as slender defoliate trunks, occasionally contracted and the lvs then subradical and the peduncles scapiform, the cauline lvs either many and crowded or few and scattered; indumentum of minute puberulence and eglandular, basally ± dilated setae, these smooth to scabrous or in few spp. arborescently plumose or basally stellate, either appressed or spreading, some often flageUiform at tip, the lfts continuously pallidor comeous-marginate, the margin slender to grossly dilated, almost always setose-ciliate; stipules either nerveless extemaUy or in few spp. striately nerved, either persistent or deciduous; leaf-formula i/(3-)4-90(-95); lf-stks mostly shorter than pinna-rachises, but in some scapose or some macrophyllidious spp. as long or longer, in several spp. all except the lowest reduced to pulvinus; spicules 0; paraphyllidia present or rarely suppressed; lfts attaining 3-50 mm in length, 3 - 9(-l l)-nerved dorsally, in aberrant M. setifera 1-nerved; peduncles (except in M. setifera) almost always solitary; capitula without filaments (5-)7-14(-20) mm diam.; flowers mostly 4-merous, random ones 5 (in M. pumilio a few 6)- merous, all haplostemonous; calyx paleaceous, when the lobes deeply decompound becoming almost pappiform, (1.5-) 1.8-2.8 (in M. calocephala attaining 7) mm; corollas (2-)2.4-5.2(-6, in M. calocephala to 8) mm, the lobes cymbiform and nearly always callous, rarely submembranous and then strongly keeled dorsally; filaments monadelphous through (0.8-)l-3(-3.5) mm, the sheath at least half as long as ovary, often as long; pods often several per capitulum but not forming a hard ball, sessile, commonly (6-) 10-26 x 4.5- 7.5 mm, rarely to 55 x 13 mm (unknown in Mm. pumilio, setifera, and thermarum), in all (1-)2^(-5)-seeded, the replum (0.2-)0.3-0.6 mm wide, shallowly constricted, the valves breaking up into free-falling indehiscent articles (perhaps subvalvate in M. uniceps).
Spp. 19, of cerrado and campo rupestre habitats on the Brazilian Planalto, 15 of them known to occur in, and 12 of these endemic to, highland centr. and s. Goias and Distrito Federal, 2 local in Mato Grosso, 3 local in highland s. Bahia and centr. Minas Gerais, M. polycephala extending n. into s.-w. Piaui, and the pluriracial M. radula from s. Goias to s.-centr. Minas Gerais and e. centr. S. Paulo.
Within ser. Mimosa the diagnostic syndrome of subser. Polycephalae consists, with rare individual exceptions, of: unarmed stems, exactly conjugate pinnae, continuously marginate leaflets nearly always of thick texture, a paleaceous or paleaceous-pappiform calyx, filaments strongly connate at base, and normally articulate craspedia.
The prevailing growth-form is wandlike, the functionally herbaceous or less often sticklike woody stem passing into an indeterminate, simple or few-branched pseudoraceme of capitula bome singly at each node.
Polycephalae of this type differ from habitally similar Brevipedes and Pogocephalae in the characteristic calyx, and from habitally simUar Dolentes in the calyx, indeterminate inflorescence, and articulate pods.
The setae of the indumentum vary from perfectly smooth to scaberulous and from scaberulous to plumose without clear discontinuity.
Plumose setae may have arisen independently twice in this series, for M. lanuginosa, which Burkart (1964) mistakenly referred to sect. Calothamnos (alias ser. Lepidotae), and M. thermarum are less like one another than the first is like M. radula and the second like M. virgula.
Of more specialized habit than the virgate species are the acaulescent M. longipes and M. pumilio, which have capitula bome on long scapiform peduncles arising directly from the root-crown or close to it; but the subacaulescent, paucicapitulate M. petiolaris provides a living link between them and the nucleus of the series.
Another extreme is attained by the dwarf caulescent M. uniceps, in which the solitary capitulum seemingly terminates a short foliate stem.
Questionably belonging to this series is the incompletely known M. setifera, which in habit, simple leaflet-venation and mostly 2- 3-nate capitula mimics unarmed forms of M. xanthocentra, but differs from these in having the calyx and monadelphous filaments proper to subser. Polycephalae.
Other mimosas compatible with subser. Polycephalae in floral characters are found in subser. Hirsutae, but most of these have subpalmately pinnate leaves and the leaflets in all are discontinuously setose-marginate.
The one member of subser. Hirsutae which may have conjugate pinnae like the Polycephalae is more often armed than not, and when both unarmed and conjugatepinnate has prostrate stems nowhere encountered in subser. Polycephalae.
Elsewhere in ser. Mimosa a paleaceous calyx coincides with free or only obscurely monadelphous filaments, or with discontinuous leaflet-margin, or with retrostrigulose corolla, or with pliantly diffuse stems, or with some of these features in combination.
Of the 32 taxa in 19 species of subser. Polycephalae recognized in this revision, only one third were known to Bentham in 1875.
Other than M. petiolaris, misplaced in ser. Pedunculosae because of its elongate peduncles, all were assigned to the polytypic ser. Meticulosae (a serial epithet in abeyance because its type-species is not identifiable).
Within ser. Meticulosae Bentham referred the species of ser. Polycephalae to three informally named subdivisions: "Polycephalae" (67-69), "Rudes" (83-86) and "Marginatae" (87-90), these sequences altemating with the Dolentes and Pogocephalae of this revision, subseries similar indeed to virgate Polycephalae in general habit, but different in minute, non-paleaceous, or only incipiently pappiform calyx, in filaments free or connate only at very base, or in determinate pseudoraceme and valvately dehiscent fruits.
Closely akin to subser. Polycephalae and perhaps artificially excluded from it are the monotypic subser. Discobolae and Dicerasteae.
The first of these differs in leaves composed of two to four well-spaced (not palmate) pairs of pinnae, and in the deeply constricted glabrous craspedium.
Mimosa dicerastes differs from all Polycephalae in the combination of fruticose or potential arborescent stature and a pair of infrastipular aculei at each node of the young stems.
Apart from their anomalous characters, M. discobola is suggestively similar to M. polycephala var. taxifolia, and M. dicerastes to M. hypoglauca.
Conspectus of subser. Polycephalae Mimosa * Inflorescence pluricapitulate, either pseudoracemose exserted or partly (whoUy) axUlary, the peduncles almost always solitary, not 2-3-nate. t Lvs plurifoliolate, the lfts of longer pinnae 20-90-jug., variable in size, (2-)3-7-nerved dorsally; cauline setae smooth or microscaberulous.
394. hypoglauca Martius a. var. hypoglauca b. var. allostegia Bameby c. var. dawsonii Bameby d. var. syncollandra Bameby 394bis. sp. 394ter. sp. 395. calocephala Martius a. var. calocephala b. var. pohlii (Bentham) Bameby 396. polycephala Bentham a. var. polycephala b. var. taxifolia Bameby 397. papposa Bentham a. var. papposa b. var. segrex Bameby 398. venatorum Bameby 399. pyrenea Taubert t t Lvs plurifoUolate, the lfts of longer pinnae 35-48-jug., to 1-2 cm, 3-4-nerved from pulvinule; setae on faces of lfts stellately branched at base; s. Mato Grosso.
400. callithrix Malme t t t Lvs plurifoliolate, the lfts of longer pinnae 26-35-jug., less than 1 cm, extemally nerveless; cauline setae plumose.
401. thermarum Bameby t t t t Lvs paucifoliolate, the lfts of longer pinnae 4-20(-21)-jug., some almost always over 1 cm and (2-)3- 11 -nerved dorsally; cauline setae smooth, scaberulous, or (M. lanuginosa) plumose.
402. lanuginosa Glaziou ex Burkart a. var. lanuginosa b. var. raduliformis Bameby 403. radula Bentham a. var. radula h. var. calycina (Bentham) Bameby c. var. semitonsa Bameby d. var. radulina Bameby e. var. imbricata (Bentham) Bameby 404. virgula Bameby 405. pseudoradula Glaziou ex Bameby a. var. detonsa Bameby b. var. anapolitana Bameby c. var. crystallites Bameby d. var. pseudoradula 406. flavocaesia Bameby 407. cyclophylla Taubert 408. petiolaris Bentham ** Capitula solitary, subterminal to short foliate stem; dwarf plant of centr. Minas Gerais, the stems 1-1.5 dm; pods valvately (?) dehiscent.
409. uniceps Bameby *** Capitula solitary on naked scapiform peduncles; acaulescent plants of Chapada dos Veadeiros, e.-centr, Goias.
410. longipes Bentham 411. pumilio Bameby **** Capitula pseudoracemose and 2-3-nate; lfts of longer pinnae 60-70-jug., small, 1-nerved dorsally; s. Mato Grosso.
412. setifera Pilger Key to species of subser. Polycephalae 1.
Setae of stems either smooth and naked, or microscopically scabemlous, or pubemlent at base only.
2.
Plants subacaulescent; capitula solitary on subradical peduncle as long as or longer than lvs; local in centr. Goias.
3.
Lf-stks 9-16 cm and peduncles 15-35 cm; lfts 7-18-jug., attaining 18-35 mm 410.
M. longipes (p. 683).
3.
Lf-stks 2-3.5 cm and peduncles 4.5-11 cm; lfts 15-50-jiig.,
attaining 3.5-5 mm 411.
M pumilio (p. 684).
2.
Plants strongly caulescent; inflorescence a (1-)2-many-capitulate pseudoraceme usually terminating a leafy axis, rarely arising from a tuft of subradical lvs.
4.
Lfts of longer pinnae 4-20-jug. 5.
Longer lfts 2-7.5 mm.
6.
Stems virgately erect 8-11 dm, densely foliate to the exserted pluricapitulate inflorescence; Sa. dos Pirineus, Goias 404.
M. virgula (p. 674).
6.
Stems 1-1.5 dm, each with 1 subterminal peduncle; highland centr. Minas Gerais 409.
M. uniceps (p. 683).
5.
Longer lfts (8-) 10-5 5 mm.
7.
Stems densely multifoliolate to the exserted pseudoraceme and at least the upper lvs, usually all, very shortly petiolate or subsessile; lfts commonly pubescent on both faces, glabrous ventrally only in var. semitonsa, local in s.-centr. Goias; widely dispersed over the Brazilian Planalto 403.
M. radula (p. 670).
7.
Stems few-leaved or all lvs subradical, and most lvs well-petiolate; lfts (except sometimes the dorsal face of proximal 1-3 pairs) glabrous on both faces.
8.
Callous margin of lfts set(ul)ose-ciliate, the cilia either spreading or forwardly appressed.
9.
Longer lfts (8-) 10-15 mm and lvs all or mostly radical or subradical; Distrito Federal and immediately adj. Goias 408.
M. petiolaris (p. 682).
9.
Longer lfts (18-)20--45(-50) mm, weU over 20 mm if the lvs subradical.
10.
Stems and inflorescence together (7-) 10-30 dm and the foliate cauline axis shorter than the emersed efoliate inflorescence; lfts when dry brown or, if glaucescent, not yellow-marginate; Goias s. and w. of Chapada dos Veadeiros and in Distrito Federal 405.
M. pseudoradula (p. 675).
10.
Stems and inflorescence together 3-7 dm and the foliate cauline axis about as long as the efoliate inflorescence; lfts when dry blue-glaucescent yellow-marginate; endemic to Chapada dos Veadeiros, e.-centr. Goias 406.
M. flavocaesia (p. 678).
8.
Callous margin of lfts smooth, esetose (sometimes minutely denticulate near Ift-tip); endemic to Chapada dos Veadeiros, e.-centr. Goias 407.
M. cyclophylla (p. 680).
4.
Lfts of longer pinnae (18-)20-95-jug. 11.
Both faces of lfts strigose with fine setulae stellately puberulent at base but smooth distally; virgate shrubs to ±2 m of Chapada dos Guimaraes in s. Mato Grosso, with extremely long pinnae (rachis 10-18 cm) and relatively ample lfts (to 11-22 x 3-5 mm); inflorescence short, simple or subcorymbose, few-capitulate, scarcely exserted from foliage 400.
M. callithrix (p. 667).
11.
Faces of lfts either glabrous or puberulent with smooth, basally naked trichomes; habit various, but the only sympatric taxon similar in foliage (M. polycephala var. taxifolia) different in amply branched, efoliate inflorescence, in pinna-rachises only 5-11(-14) cm, and in usually facially glabrous lfts.
12 Capitula without filaments (11-) 12-20 mm diam.; known certainly only from centr. upland Minas Gerais (doubtfully from Bahia) 395.
M. calocephala (p. 661).
12.
Capitula without filaments 5-10.5 mm diam.; widespread over the Brazilian Planalto.
13.
Peduncles all or mostly subtended by a coeval or hysteranthous If, not forming an elongate efoliate pseudoraceme or panicle; centr. Bahia to n.-centr. Minas Gerais, w. locally into e.-centr. Goias 394.
M. hypoglauca (p. 658).
13.
Peduncles all or mostly subtended only by bracteiform stipules, forming a simple or branched, efoliate inflorescence far exserted from foliage; transfranciscan Bahia w.-ward.
14.
Lfts of longer pinnae 20^6-jug. 15.
Longer pinna-rachises 5-14 cm; inflorescence a pyramidal panicle; s.-w. Piaui and n.-w. Bahia to s. Mato Grosso and adj. Goias and Mato Grosso do Sul 396.
M. polycephala (p. 662).
15.
Longer pinna-rachises 4-7 cm; inflorescence strictly few-branched or simple; local in n.-w. Distrito Federal and adj. Goias, on sources of rio Maranhao, and (var.) on Sa. dos Cristais in s.-e. Goias 397.
M. papposa (p. 664).
14.
Lfts of longer pinnae 45-95-jug.; local in highland centr. Goias and s. Mato Grosso.
16.
Lf-stks of lvs at and below mid-stem (0.3-)0.5-7 cm, shorter distally; larger lfts 5-13 x 1.3-3 mm.
17.
Dorsal face of lfts prominently 5-7-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib forwardly displaced to divide blade 1:1.5-2.5 and branched beyond middle, the primary nerve on each side of it produced nearly to blade apex; peduncles solitary; bracts ciliate with flexuous setae that conceal the fl-buds prior to anthesis; corollas mostly 3-4 mm; Chapada dos Veadeiros, e.-centr. Goias 398.
M. venatorum (p. 665).
17.
Dorsal face of lfts 1 -nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric and simple; peduncles mosUy fasciculate by 2-3; bracts minutely weakly ciUolate, the fl-buds exserted; corollas ±2.3-2.8 mm; Cuiaba, Mato Grosso 412.
M. setifera (p. 686).
16.
Lf-stks of all lvs subobsolete; larger lfts 3-6 x 0.7-1.2 mm; Sas. dos Pirineus and Dourada in centr. Goias 399.
M. pyrenea (p. 666).
Setae of stems arborescently plumose; s. Goias and Distrito Federal.
18.
Lfts of longer pinnae 26-35-jug., attaining 5-9 mm in length, veinless or faintly 1-nerved at tip; s. Goias 401.
M. thermarum (p. 668).
18.
Lfts of longer pinnae 3-11-jug., attaining 13-33 mm in length, dorsally 3-5-nerved from pulvinule; Distrito Federal and immediately adj. Goias 402.
M. lanuginosa (p. 669).
394.
Mimosa hypoglauca Martius, Flora 21(2, Beibl.
4-5): 53 (=Herb. fl. bras. 133).
1838.- Typus infra sub var. hypoglauca indicatur.
Stiff unarmed microphyllidious subshrubs (1-) 1.5-20 dm, the stems at first or permanently virgate from xylopodium or in age acquiring a defoliate trunk and paniculately branched distally, the homotinous stems either hispid or strigose with coarse setae to ±1-2 mm, the back of lf-stks consistently strigose, the uppermost stem and peduncles often silky with looser longer flagelliform setae, the foliage olivaceous glaucescent, the boldly pallid-marginate lfts usually glabrous facially but sometimes setulose dorsally or finely puberulent on both faces, always setoseciliate, the solitary or exceptionally geminate peduncles axillary either to contemporary or to hysteranthous lvs, or a few of the furthest shortly pseudoracemose.
Stipules firm erect, Unear-lanceolate 3-7 X 0.4-0.9 mm, dorsally either densely setose or only puberulent, becoming dry and then fragile, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks of lvs below mid-stem 1-9 mm, of upper lvs 0-5 mm; pinnae 1-jug., stiffly ascending-spreading, the rachis of longer ones (2-)3-7(-7.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (0.6-)0.8-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (21-)25-47(-50)-jug., decrescent only at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.2-1.2 mm distant from pulvinus or from minute paraphyllidia concealed by setae, the blades commonly semi-ovate or narrowly lance-oblong from semi-cordate base, exceptionally Unear-oblong, abruptly apiculate, those at mid-rachis mostly (5.5_)6_9 X (1.3-)1.6-2.8 mm and 3-5 times as long as wide, rarely 3.5-5 x 0.6-1.2 mm and 4- 7 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath weakly (2-)3-4-nerved from pulvinule, the straight simple midrib dividing blade 1:1.5-4, the inner (or only) posterior nerve produced almost to blade apex, the outer ones much shorter.
Peduncles 2-5(-6) cm; capitula globose, without filaments 5-10.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis either moriform or the buds concealed by fine bracteal setae; bracts linear-spatulate or -oblanceolate 1.6-3.5 X 0.25-0.5 mm, either densely setose dorsally from middle upward or glabrous dorsally and ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some or many below mid-capitulum staminate; calyx paleaceous, glabrous except for rare basal cilia. (1.3-)1.6-2.8(-3) mm, the shallowly or deeply lacerate-decompound lobes united into a cup 0.5-0.8 mm; corolla 2.5-4.2(-4.5) mm, the callous cymbiform lobes 1.1-1.3 x 0.6-0.8 mm, microscopically papillose at tip; filaments pink, monadelphous through 1.2-2.5 mm around the ovary, exserted 5-8 mm.
Pods (1-)2-13 per capitulum, sessile at cuneate base, in profile elliptic 1-seeded to undulately oblong or oblong-oblanceolate 2-4(-5)-seeded, (6-) 12-26 x 4.5-6 mm, the shallowly constricted replum 0.3-0.6 mm wide, the stiffly papery valves plane or low-colliculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike either densely yellowish-pilose with puberulent tapering setae to 1-2 mm, or scabrous with basally dilated, nearly smooth setae to 1 mm, or the replum scabrous and the valves glabrous, the valves when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles ±4.5-6.5 mm long; seeds (poorly known) lentiform ±3.5 x 2.7 mm, the testa smooth but scarcely lustrous, either light brown or fuscous.
The racially complex M. hypoglauca is closely related to M. venatorum, M. papposa and M. pyrenea, all of which have similar marginate leaflets, paleaceous calyx, and filaments monadelphous around the ovary, and is weakly distinguished by mostly axillary, rather than pseudoracemose, capitula, all or nearly aU the peduncles being subtended at or immediately following anthesis of the capitulum by fully expanded leaves.
Each variety, however, differs from each of the kindred species in other technical characters, and each has, so far as now known, its own area of dispersal.
The var. hypoglauca, confined to the highlands of southem Bahia and northem Minas Gerais east of rio S. Francisco, has no close relative in its range.
The transfranciscan varieties are vicariant with M. venatorum, but differ from it in leaflet-number (±20-50, not 50-95 pairs in longer leaves).
Key to varieties of M. hypoglauca Adult stems 6-20 dm, defoliate proximally and usually branched distally; n.-centr. Minas Gerais n. through interior Bahia just into s. Piaui.
2.
Capitula without filaments 8-10.5 mm diam.; blade of floral bracts densely setose dorsally, the setae prior to anthesis concealing the fl-buds; corollas 3—4.3(-4.5) mm; cisfranciscan Bahia and Minas Gerais in lat. ± 13*'30'-16°30'S; pod densely pilose with tapering yellowish puberulent setae 394a. var. hypoglauca (p. 659).
2.
Capitula without filaments 5-7.5 mm diam.; blade of floral bracts glabrous dorsally, sparingly setulose-ciliolate, the cilia before anthesis not concealing the fl-buds; corollas 2.5-3.1 mm; n.-w. Bahia and adj. Piaui in lat. ±9°30'-14°S; pod unknown 394. var. allostegia (p. 659).
Adult stems simple (0.6-) 1-3.5 dm; local in e.-centr. Goias; pod either scabrous with smooth, basaUy dilated and appressed setae or the valves glabrous.
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 21-33-jug., the blades semi-ovate or falcately lanceolate, 3-4-nerved dorsally, the longer ones 5.5-8 x 2-2.5 mm, 3-3.6 times as long as wide; calyx % as long as corolla; valves of pod scabrous-strigose with basally dilated setae to 1-4 x 0.3-0.5 mm; s. end of Chapada dos Veadeiros n. of S. Joao da Alianfa 394c. dawsonii (p. 660).
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 35-50-jug., the blades subsymmetrically Unear-oblong, 2(-3)-nerved dorsally, the longer ones 3.5-5 x 0.6-1.2 mm, 4-7 times as long as wide; calyx ±yi as long as corolla; valves of pod glabrous or microscopically puberulent, not setose; Sa.
Geral de Goias s. of S. Joao da Alian^a.
394d. var. syncollandra (p. 660).
394a. Mimosa hypoglauca Martius var. hypoglauca.
M. hypoglauca Martius, 1838, I.e., sens, str.—"Crescit in deserto Minarum inter Bananal et vicum Formigas, et alibi, et prope Caietete, in provinciae Bahiensis mediterraneis."
—Lectotypus, Martius 1512, ex parte, labelled: "ad Serra de San Antonio et alibi Serro Frio .
.
."
, cited by Bentham, 1876: 338, M! = F Neg. 6186; syntypus, Martius 1512, ex parte, labelled "in silvis ad Caietete et in deserto Serro Frio."
, M!—A third specimen from Caietete (M!) was correctly identified by Bentham as M. xanthocentra var. subsericea.
M. hypoglauca sensu Bentham, 1875: 405; sensu Lewis, 1987, fig. 9N. Lfts of pinnae 30-47-jug., narrowly lance-oblong, the larger ones ±6.5-8.5 x 1.3-2 mm, 3.5- 5 times as long as wide, facially glabrous, the blades mostly 2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib dividing blade 1:2.5-3; capitula and pod as given in key to varieties.
In cerrado and campo rupestre, 950-1300 m, local on and near crest of Chapada Diamantina and Sa. do Espinhago from e. slope of Pico de Almas near 13*'30'S in Bahia s. to ±18°30'S in n.-centr. Minas Gerais (Grao Mogol, Francisco Sa, Buen6polis).-n. VII-IX, XII-III, the fuU season not documented.
394b. Mimosa hypoglauca Martius var. allostegia Bameby [in Lewis, Leg. Bahia 136.
1987, nomen nudum], var. nov., a var. hypoglauca capitulomm minorum absque filamentis 5- 7.5 (nec 8-10.5) mm diam. ante anthesin moriformium bracteis dorso glabris parce breviterque setoso-ciliolatis alabastmm haud obtegentibus patriaque plerumque transfranciscana diversa.—Brazil.
Bahia: 7 km s. of rio Piau, ±150 km s.-w. of Barreiras, 850 m, 13.
IV. 1966 (fl), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 74655.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Lfts of longer pinnae ±25-30-jug., semi-ovate, facially glabrous, the longer ones (5.5-)6-9 x 1.6-2.8 mm, 3-5 times as long as wide, 3-4- nerved from pulvinule; capitula as given in key; pod unknown.
In cerrado and carrasco, sometimes in sandy soUs, 600-850 m, scattered on both slopes of lower-middle S. Francisco vaUey, from s.-most Piaui (Sa. das Confusoes) into n.-w. Bahia (Sa. do Gentio; Espigao Mestre), in lat. ±9°-14°S.— Fl.
IV-VII, XII, the fuU range unknown.
394c. Mimosa hypoglauca Martius var. dawsonii Bameby, var. nov., statura demissa (caulibus 30(-35) cm usque longis) cum var. syncollandra congruens, ab ilia foliolis minus numerosis 21-33 (nec 35-50)-jugis usque ambitu (ut apud var. allostegiam) semi-ovatis vel falcato-lanceolatis 5.5-8 x 2-2.5 mm usque, calyce quam corollam tertia parte (nec dimidio) breviori, leguminisque valvulis setis laevibus basi bulbosis appressis vel anguste adscendentibus strigoso-hispidis diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros 38 km n. of S. Joao da Alian9a, 25.
IV. 1956 (fl), E. Yale Dawson 14544.—Yiolotypus, NY; isotypus, US. Leaflets and pods as described in key to varieties; capitula without filaments 8-9 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform.
In campo sujo near 900-1000 m, known only from the s. end of Chapada dos Veadeiros, on sources of rio Tocantinzinho, near 14°30'S in e.- centr. Goias.-Fl.
IV-V(-?); fr ripe in III. 394d. Mimosa hypoglauca Martius var. syncollandra Bameby, var. nov., statura nana cum varietate praecedenti comparabilis, ab ilia foliolis pinnarum majorum 35-50-jugis ambitu lineari-oblongis plerumque 2-nerviis, majoribus 3.5-5 X 0.6-6-12 mm usque, calyce corollam attingenti, leguminisque valvulis esetosis minutim pubemlis nudisve diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Sa.
Geral do Parana 10 km s. of S. Joao da Alian9a, 17.
III.1971 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Harley & G. L. Smith) i20^i.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, K, NY, R, US. Leaflets and pods as described in key to varieties; capitula without filaments 6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform.
In campo at ±950 m, known only from Sa.
Geral do Parana s. of S. Joao da Alianga, at ± 15°S in e. Goias.-n.(?-)II-IV. 394bis.
Mimosa sp.—Brazil.
Bahia: in cerrado at 600 m, 8 km n.-w. of Barreiras toward Sta. Rita de Cassia, vaUey of rio das Ondas, 3.
III.1971, Irwin (with Harley & G. L. Smith) 31431 (G, K, NY, R, UB, US, mostly sterile leafy stems).
Stout erect few-branched shrubs 2.5 m with dark defoliate tmnks and densely long-lvd developing branches, strigose throughout with forwardly appressed setae, those of stems and lfstks scaberulous, those of Ift-faces smooth or almost so, the firm glaucescent lfts coarsely continuously callous-marginate and appressed-ciliolate, the inflorescence unknown.
Stipules firm, narrowly lanceolate 2-4 x 0.5 mm, densely strigose dorsally, glabrous castaneous within.
Leafstalks reduced to pulvinus or almost so, 1-3 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 8-14 cm, the interfoliolar segments 2.5-4 mm, paraphyllidia 0; lfts 33- 47-jug., the small unequal first pair close to pulvinus, the blades lance-oblong from semicordate base, abruptly deltate-apiculate, those near midrachis 8.5-16 X 2.2-4 mm. (3.2-)3.5-4.5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 4-6- nerved from pulvinule, the midrib strongly displaced, the innermost posterior nerve produced almost to blade apex, the outer ones progressively shorter.
Fruiting peduncles solitary 1-1.5 cm; fresh flowers unknown, but dried fragments suggestive of M. hypoleuca, the calyx certainly paleaceous.
Pods (fragmentary) 3^-seeded, the replum ascending-setose ±0.5 mm wide, otherwise unknown.
This diflers from M. hypoglauca in stem-pubescence of barbellate setae, in very long pinnae (8-14, not 6-9 cm), and in leaflets pubescent on both faces.
The specimens do not provide good comparisons with the distantly allopatric M. callithrix, but differ materially in leaves all sessile and leaflet-indumentum of simple smooth setae.
394ter.
Mimosa sp.—Brazil.
Goias: between rio Salobre and Natividade, near 11°45'S, BurcheU 8238 (K, sterile).
Perhaps a wandlike shrub with slender defoliate trunk branched distally, the homotinous branchlets, pinna-rachises and continuous lftmargin densely strigose with coarse tapering, microscopically scaberulose setae, the dark brown lfts glabrous ventrally, pubemlent dorsally (the proximal ones of each rachis more densely so), the inflorescence unknown.
Stipules Unear-lanceolate 3-A mm, dorsally pubescent like stem, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks reduced or almost so to hard pulvinus; pinnae 1-jug., the incurved rachis 8-12 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1.5-2 mm; lfts ±40-50-jug., densely imbricate and gradually decrescent near each end of rachis, in outUne falcately lanceolate from semicordate base, acute, those at mid-rachis ±9-10 x 2-2.5 mm, 4-4.5 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath pallidly 5-nerved from pulvinule, the simple midrib strongly displaced forward, the inner posterior nerve expiring just short of apex, the outer ones successively shorter, the marginal setae at base ±0.2 mm diam., free for 2-2.5 mm.
The barren specimen described above suggests a species related to M. hypoglauca, M. papposa, and M. callithrix.
It resembles the last in the minutely puberulent setae, but diflers in subsessile leaves.
Mimosa papposa and M. hypoglauca have pinnae only half as long, and smooth setae.
Nearly akin and possibly conspecific is Irwin 31431 (NY) from northwest Bahia at about the latitude of Natividade (described above sub no. 394bis).
This is similar in scaberulous setae, sessile leaves and very long pinnae, but has glaucescent, straight (not falcate) leaflets puberulent on both faces.
395.
Mimosa calocephala Martius, Flora 21(2, Beibl.
4-5): 53 (=Herb. fl. bras. 133).
1838.- Typus infra sub var. calocephala indicatur.
Unarmed subshrubs with erect or incurvedascending, simple or distally few-branched stems 3-5 dm and at base 2.5-4 mm diam., proximally hispid with ascending setae to ± 1 mm and distally like back of lf-stks and peduncles silky with longer, eventually matted-woollyflageUiformsetae, the dry foliage pinkish-brown subglaucescent, the firm plane, continuously comeous-marginate lfts facially glabrous (except dorsal face of first pair), setose-ciliate, the relatively stout peduncles solitary in distal If-axils or 2-3 of the furthest ones exserted from foliage.
Stipules firm erect lanceolate or lance-ovate 4-8 x 1-2 mm, densely hispid-setose dorsally, glabrous within, either persistent or tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks of lvs at and below midstem either reduced to pulvinus or at most 12 mm, that of upper lvs always obsolete or almost so; pinnae I -jug.,
widely spreading, their rachis 5.5-10 cm, rounded dorsally, keeled ventrally and laterally, shaUowly excavated between successive pulvinules, the longer interfoUolar segments 2-5 mm; lfts 18- 29-jug., decrescent near each end of rachis, the moderately unequal first pair close to small paraphyllidia concealed by setae, all obliquely lanceoblong, elliptic, or oblong-eUiptic from shallowly semicordate base, either obtuse-mucronate or deltately subacute, the longer ones 7-15 x 2.5- 4 mm, 1.7-4.5 times as long as wide, the blades all veinless above, beneath 5-7-nerved from pulvinule, the almost straight midrib dividing blade 1:2.5-3, the inner posterior nerve almost attaining blade apex, the one weaker anterior nerve and other posterior nerves shorter, expiring within the margin, the forwardly subappressed cilia free for 0.5-1.3 mm.
Peduncles 2-5.5 cm; capitula subglobose, dense and hard, without filaments (10-)11-20 mm diam.; receptacle hispid; bracts 3-5 x 0.2-0.8 mm, distally setose on back and margins; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, many proximal ones staminate; calyx narrowly vaseshaped , basally attenuate, paleaceous, 3-7 mm, either glabrous or basally ciliolate, the tube 1- 3.5 mm, the lobes 1.8-3.5 mm, setiform-decompound ± half-way to base; corollas subcylindric 3.8-8 mm, glabrous, the cymbiform, either subcorneous or scarcely thickened, dorsally carinate and lustrous lobes 1-1.3 x 0.4-0.55 mm; filaments (of var. calocephala, otherwise unknown) pink, monadelphous through ±2.5 mm and the tube basally adnate to corolla, exserted ±8 mm.
Pods several from near and beyond mid-capitulum, sessile and embedded at base in persistent sterile fls, in profile obovate-elliptic to oblongelUptic and (1-)2-3-seeded or oblong-oblanceolate 4-seeded, (8-) 12-18 x 5 mm, the replum 0.2-0.45 mm wide, shallowly constricted between seeds, minutely apiculate, hispid with pluriseriate setae to ±1.5-2 mm, the firmly papery valves hispidly pilose or silky-setose with tapering, minutely scaberulous setae nearly as long as or a little longer than those of replum, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent biconvex articles 3.5-6 mm long; seeds (few seen) lentiform 3-3.5 x 2.7-3 mm, the smooth testa either light-brown or fuscous, sublustrous.
Mimosa calocephala is very closely related to M. hypoglauca sensu lato, and when better known may perhaps be viewed as a series of large-flowered, therefore fat-headed forms or varieties of that species, culminating in the extremely largeflowered var. pohlii.
The firm glaucescent, corneously marginate leaflets and dense consistency of the capitula at anthesis recall some unarmed forms of M. dolens, but the large paleaceous calyx, the monadelphous filaments, and the aero- 662 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 petal maturation of the capitula argue against close relationship in that direction.
Moreover the craspedium is that of ser. Polycephalae.
Key to varieties of M. calocephala 1.
Lf-stks 5-12 mm; lfts lance-oblong up to 2.5^ mm wide and 2.5-4.5 times as long as wide; capitula without filaments 11-14 mm diam.; calyx 3-4.5 mm, the tube 1-1.5 mm; corolla 3.8- 4.7 mm 395a. var. calocephala (p. 662).
1.
Lf-stks not over 4 mm; lfts elliptic to oblongelUptic, to 5.5-7.5 mm wide and 1.7-2.3 times as long as wide; capitula without filaments 16- 20 mm diam.; calyx 5-7 mm, the tube 2.5-3.5 mm; corolla 7-8 mm.
395b. var. pohlii (p. 662).
395a. Mimosa calocephala Martius var. calocephala.
M. calocephala Martius, 1838, I.e., sens, str.—"Crescit cum [M. hypoglauca].^\ i.e., "in desertis Minarum inter praedium Bananal et vicum Formigas, et alibi, et prope Caietete, in Prov. Bahiensis mediterraneis."
—Holotypus, Martius 1513, labelled: "in campis interioribus aridissimis arboribus consitis ad Caietete et versus Vao do Paranan etc. prov. Min.
Gener. et Bahiensis."
, M! = FNeg.
6776; paratypus, Martius s.n.,
labelled: "Serro Frio."
, M! M. calocephala sensu Bentham, 1875: 404, exclus.
M. pohlii; 1876: 336.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In campo rupestre near 100-1300 m, known by modem collections only from the slopes of Sa. do Espinha^o near Mendanha (mun. Couto de Magalhaes) and at points 27-29 km (by road) s.-w. of Diamantina (mun. Gouveia), lat. ±18°00-30'S in centr. Minas Gerais, the stations in n.-centr. Minas Gerais and s. Bahia indicated in the protologue requiring confirmation.-Fl.
VIII-XII(-?).
395b. Mimosa calocephala Martius var. pohlii (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. pohlii Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 375.
1841.-"Brazil, Po/z/."-Holotypus, K(hb. Benth.)!'isotypi, F! K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1828, and numbered Pohl d 1410, NY! W! Characters as given in key to varieties.
Known only from the ample type-collection, very likely collected in montane Minas Gerais, but neither habitat nor locality recorded.
The var. pohlii exceeds all other Polycephalae in size of capitula and component flowers.
The constancy of this character is unknown.
396.
Mimosa polycephala Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 374.
1841.—Typus infra sub var. polycephala indicatur.
Virgately erect or stiffly assurgent subshrubs 1- 2 m, with mostly simple, sometimes distally fewbranched stems densely clothed from base to middle or beyond with close-set sessUe lvs, thence passing upward into a few-branched efoliate panicle of pseudoracemose globose capitula rising 2.5-6(-7.5) dm above foliage, the stems and lfstks strigose with appressed or hispid with erect, smooth or microscopically scaberulous setae to (0.5-)l-3 mm, the axes of infforescence more softly and densely pilose with flagelliform setae, the firm plane pallid-marginate, usually facially glabrous but rarely silky-strigulose, always setose-ciliate lfts dull purplish-brown overlaid with dove-gray glaucous bloom.
Stipules often deciduous before maturity of associate If, consequently little known, the few seen firm, narrowly lanceolate 4-7 X 0.4-0.8 mm, setose dorsaUy.
Leaves all sessile against the stem or a few of the lowest raised on a petiole less than 5 mm; pinnae 1 -jug.,
the rachis of longer ones 5-11 (-14) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments l-4.5(-5) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (17-)20-46-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis but otherwise subequilong, appearing contiguous or narrowly imbricate and sessile against rachis on very short pulvinule, the anterior one of first pair much smaller than its fellow, all in outline narrowly oblong or lanceoblong from obliquely obtusangulate or rarely subdUated base, at apex obtuse apiculate or acute, straight or obscurely falcate, the larger ones (5-)7- 12 X (1.3-)1.7-4.5(-5)mm, ±3-5(-5.5) times as long as wide, commonly 6-7-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2- 3, the single anterior nerve and two inner posterior ones produced nearly to blade apex, the outer posterior ones shorter, a weak secondary venulation sometimes developed, all venation prominulous dorsally, obscure or fully immersed ventrally, or (in var. polycephala) immersed on both faces, the marginal setae 1-seriate ascending, free through 0.3-0.7 mm.
Peduncles solitary (4-)6-25 mm; capitula without filaments (5.5-)6- 9 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but sometimes hispid with shortly emergent bracteal setae, the fl-buds densely minutely scabemlouspubemlent beyond middle; bracts linear-spatulate 1.3-2.6 X 0.2-0.4 mm, glabrous dorsally, ciliate near dilated apex; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some smaller lower ones staminate; calyx pallidly paleaceous 1.5-2.3 mm, the tube 0.5- 0.8 mm, the fimbriately decompound lobes 1- 1.7 mm; corolla narrowly funnelform (2-)2.4- 3.6 mm, the firm cymbiform, dorsally carinate lobes (0.7-)0.8-l. 1 x 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments pink fading whitish, at base monadelphous through 0.8-1.9 mm, exserted (3.5-)4-7.5 mm.
Pods to three per capitulum, often solitary, potentially 3-seeded but often only 1 ovule fertile, the sessile body piano-compressed, in profile 10-15 x 6- 7.5 mm, the replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, constricted between seeds, the papery, pale brown valves ±0.05 mm thick at middle of each article, a little thicker at margins and at isthmi, at once densely puberulent and thinly strigose-hispid with forwardly appressed or loosely ascending setae to ±1-1.5 mm, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into broadly elUptic free-falling lentiform articles 8-10 mm long; seeds plumply discoid, in broad view round-elliptic 5.5 x 4-5 mm, the testa dull brown, fuscous within the pleurogram.
A striking mimosa, notable for tall virgate stems and for the metallic dove-gray bloom of mature leaves, which densely clothe the stem up to an exserted panicle of small capitula, but which tend to disjoint in the dry season.
Lacking the fruit, Bentham misplaced M. taxifolia among Meticulosae with valvately dehiscent pods.
The close relationship is now perceived to be with M. radula, which may have quite similar growth-habit and is scarcely different in ffower-structure or craspedium, and has similar scaberulous setae.
The leaffets of M. radula are, however, for the most part at once broader and more emphatically inequilateral.
The known range of M radula lies to the east and south of that of M. polycephala var. taxifolia, except that both are known to occur near Itiquira in northeast Mato Grosso do Sul. In this station M. radula is represented by its var. calycina, which differs greatly from var. taxifolia in lower leaves at once petiolate and extremely ample.
As M. polycephala has become better known, the claim of M taxifolia Bentham to independent specific rank has faded.
Bentham contrasted the 15-20 pairs of facially glabrous leaffets found in the type of M. taxifolia with 30-40 pairs of appressed-villosulous leaffets in that of M polycephala.
We now have examples of as many as 42 pairs of leaffets in M. taxifolia and one, collected in the type-locality by Riedel, has leaffets scabrous-strigulose facially.
The type-collection of M. polycephala differs, so far as it goes, from M. taxifolia, in very slightly more numerous but also more crowded leaffets almost veinless on both faces, although the same pattem of venation, embedded in the epidermis, is perceptible extemally.
The ffowers, and the fruits which were unknown to Bentham (the young fruit of M. polycephala described in Flora brasiliensis is from a galled ffower), have tumed out to be essentially identical.
I take them to represent vicariant varieties.
The mutually distant origins of M. taxifolia and M. polycephala were both misunderstood by Bentham.
Riedel's Sa. da Chapada is in southem Mato Grosso, not in Minas Gerais, and Gardner's Rio Preto is in northwest Bahia, not in Pemambuco.
Nevertheless, there remains to this day a gap of some 700 km between the eastem known limit of M. polycephala var. taxifolia sens, str. in the Araguaia valley in Mato Grosso and the narrow dispersal-range of var. polycephala in southem Piaui and northwestem Bahia.
The species should obviously be sought in the Tocantins valley in northem Goias.
Key to varieties of M. polycephala 1.
Lfts of longer pinnae 20-35(-42)-jug., inserted along rachis at intervals of 2.5-5 mm, aU glabrous or exceptionally thinly scabrous-strigulose on both faces, always strongly veined dorsally; s.-e. Mato Grosso, n.-e. Mato Grosso do Sul, and s.-w. Goias 396a. var. taxifolia (p. 663).
1.
Leaflets of longer pinnae 36-46-jug., crowded along rachis at intervals of 1-2.5 mm, aU finely densely strigulose and almost veinless on both faces; s.-w. Piaui and n.-w. Bahia 396b. var. polycephala (p. 664).
396a. Mimosa polycephala Bentham var. taxifolia Bameby, nom. et stat. nov. M. taxifolia Bongard ex Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 373.
1841, nom. illeg.-"'Chapada,' in Brazil [=Chapada dos Guimaraes n.-e. of Cuiaba, Mato Grosso, leg. Riedel, commun.] Langsdorff.''-Holotypus, Riedel 118 = 1838 = 985, collected V.1827 (fl), K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1810; isotypi.
A! NY!—Non M. taxifolia (WiUdenow) Poiret, Encycl. suppl. 1: 59.
1810.
M. taxifolia sensu Bentham, 1875: 401 (errore e prov. Minas Gerais indicata); 1876: 328.
Characters of the species as modified in key to varieties.
In cerrado, 350-700 m, sometimes colonial on roadsides, locally plentiful on headwaters of rio Araguaia and on both slopes of the AraguaiaParaguai watershed in s. and s.-e. Mato Grosso, n.-e. Mato Grosso do Sul, and far s.-w. Goias, BrazU, in lat. 14°-17°S, long. 52°-57°W.-n. IIIV, VI-VIII; fr.
VI-VIII(-?).
396b. Mimosa polycephala Bentham var. polycephala.
M. polycephala Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens, str.—"Prov. of Pemambuco, Gardner, n. 2832."
, the locality expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 329.
1876 to: "ad Rio Preto prope Santa Rita provinciae Pemambuco."
—Holotypus, collected IX. 1839 (fl) in the Preto valley near 11°S, 45°45'W in n.-w. Bahia (not Pernambuco), K (hb. Hook.)! = IPA Neg. 1266 = NY Neg. 1811; isotypi, BM! K (hb. Benth.)! = IPA Neg. 7267.
M. polycephala sensu Bentham, 1875: 328.
Characters of the species as modified in key to varieties.
In unspecified environment, to be expected in cerrado or cerrado-caatinga transition near 550 m, known only from the type-locality in n.-w. Bahia and from Ribeiro Gongalves in s.-w. Piaui, BrazU.-Fl.
IX-X(-?).
397.
Mimosa papposa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 375.
1841.—Typus infra sub var. papposa indicatur.
Stiffly erect subshrubs ±7-10 dm, closely resembling M. pyrenea and M. venatorum in habit, inflorescence and individual fl, the former especially in subsessile lvs and glaucous stramineous-marginate lfts, but different from both in shorter lf-stks and fewer lfts per pinna, the pseudoracemes of capitula rising 1.5-2.5 dm above developed lvs.
Stipules (few seen) linear-lanceolate 5-6 mm, caducous.
Leaf-stalks including pulvinus less than 3 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 4-7 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (25-)28-45-jug., Unearoblong or lance-ovate, acute or apiculate, straight or a little arched forward, those near mid-rachis 5-10.5 X 1-2.5 mm, 2.4-5.5 times as long as wide, all smooth above, beneath faintly 3-6- nerved from pulvinule but the nerves only weakly prominulous, the midrib, when perceptible, dividing blade ±1:2.
Peduncles solitary (2-)4-35 mm; capitula globose, without filaments 7.5-9 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the ffbuds minutely papillose-puberulent; bracts linear-spatulate 1.3-2 X 0.3 mm, thinly setulose at tip; flowers with paleaceous 1.6-2.4 mm calyces, the deeply decompound lobes subpappiform; corolla 2.8-3.6 mm, the cymbiform lobes 1.1-1.5 X 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through ±1.5 mm, exserted 5.5-6.5 mm.
Pods (few seen) few per capitulum, in profile undulately oblong, to 4-seeded and ± 3 0 x 7 mm, the replum 0.5-0.6 mm wide, the planocompressed, free-falling indehiscent articles 7-8 mm long, like the replum densely pilose with forwardly subappressed, tapering yellowish, microscopically scaberulous setae to 1-2.5 mm.
Mimosa papposa, M. pyrenea and M. venatorum constitute a replacement-series of which the collective range is nearly repeated in sect. Habbasia ser. Pachycarpae by M. setosissima, and M. densa, each group having a member endemic to or represented on Chapada dos Veadeiros, Sa. dos Pireneus, and Sa. dos Cristais, islands of arenitic caprock rising from an ocean of cerrado.
Each group consists presumably of relic expressions of a homogeneous, widespread type, their insular nature having encouraged genetic drift and the fixation of a new specific identity.
Mimosa papposa differs from its two closest relatives, M. pyrenea and M. venatorum, in fewer leaffets (in larger leaves less, not more than fifty pairs); further from M. pyrenea in longer, less crowded leaffets, and in completely leaffess pseudoracemes; and further from M. venatorum in abbreviated leaf-stalk in all leaves, pinnae only half as long, and glaucescent leaffets almost nerveless dorsally.
The less closely related M. hypoglauca, aUopatric to the north and east, differs in mostly foliate pseudoracemes and leaffets essentially 2-, not 3-6-nerved from pulvinule.
So far as known today M. papposa is of sparing occurrence on the headwaters of rio Maranhao in the northwestem comer of the Federal District and in adjoining Goias, and is represented on Sa. dos Cristais by a weakly differentiated variety, these separable as follows: Key to varieties of M. papposa 1.
Lfts narrowly oblong, the larger ones 5.5-10.5 x 1-2.2 mm, 4-5.5 times as long as wide; peduncles 15-35 mm; upper Maranhao basin in n.-w. Distrito Federal and adj. Goias 397a. var. papposa (p. 665).
1.
Lfts narrowly obliquely ovate, distinctly broadest near base, the longer ones 5-8 x 1,5-2.5 mm, ±2.5-3.5 times as long as wide; peduncles (2-) 4-13 mm; Sa. dos Cristais, s.-e. Goias 397b. var. segrex (p. 665).
397a. Mimosa papposa Bentham var. papposa.
M. papposa Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens, str.— "Brazil, Pohl.'\ the locality particularized in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 337.
1876: ".
.
. ad Rio Maranhao provinciae Goyaz."
—Holotypus, Pohl d.l467 = 1790, K (hb. Hook.)" = NY Neg. 1829; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54854, M! = F Neg. 6193, NY! W! M. papposa sensu Bentham, 1875: 404; 1876: 337, max. ex parte, exclus.
WeddeU 3635bis, quae = M. xanthocentra var. tremula.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In open places near the interface between campo cerrado and campo rupestre, (7)800-1050 m, apparently localized about the sources of rio Maranhao at lat. 14°30'-15°35'S in n.-w. Distrito Federal and adj. Goias, Brazil.—Fl.
V-VIII. 397b. Mimosa papposa Bentham var. segrex Bameby, var. nov., foliolis ad medias pinnas anguste oblique ovatis ±2.5-3.5 (nec 4-5.5)- plo longioribus quam latioribus, pedunculis abbreviatis ±4-13 (nec 15-35) mm longis, patriaque aliena divergens.—Brazil.
Goias: 5 km w. of Cristalina, 1175 m, 2.
XI.1965 (fr), Irwin (with Souza & Reis dos Santos) 9788. — Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, R, US. Characters as given in key to varieties and in diagnosis.
On sandstone caprock at ±1175 m, known only from Sa. dos Cristais, lat. 16°50'S in s.-e. Goias, BrazU.-Fl. (?)IX-X. 398.
Mimosa venatorum Bameby, sp. nov., hinc M. pyreneae, illinc M. papposae, ambabus allopatricis arete affinis, ab utraque petiolis inferioribus 1-7 cm usque (nec 0-0.4 cm) longis, ulterius a prima, quoad foliola numerosissima (plemmque 50-95-juga) comparabiU foliolis subduplo longioribus (6-13, nec 3-6 mm usque longis) et ulterius a secunda foliolomm paribus ±28-45 (nec 50-95)-jugis secus rachin 7-16 (nec 4-7) cm longam dispositis diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros, rocky slopes, 1000 m, ± 10 km s. of Alto Paraiso, 23.
III.1969 (ff), Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 24962. —Holotypus, UB; isotypi, F, IAN, NY (2 sheets), US. M. urbaniana Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 184.
1906, nom. nud.—"Cabeceiras do Rio Sant'Anna .. .
Goyaz, no. 21076."—Specimina authentica, collected 8.1.1895 (in bud only), +B = F Neg. 1442\ K! P! Slender, distantly foliate unarmed subshrubs (3-)4-l 0 dm, the erect or stiffly ascending, simple or few-branched stems ±1.5-3.5 mm diam. at base, below infforescence at once puberulent and strigose with forwardly appressed tapering scaberulous setae to ±1-2 mm, these longer and looser upward, in the infforescence prolonged into fine ffexuous ffagelliform tip, the lf-stks strigose like lower stem, the vertically imbricate, subconcolorous brown-olivaceous, comeous-marginate lfts facially glabrous, appressed-setose-ciliate, the distantly few-capitulate, simple pseudoracemose or weakly branched infforescence exserted 1-4.5 dm above foliage.
Stipules firm erect, lanceolate 4-9 x 1-1.5 mm, dorsally strigose, glabrous within, deciduous before associated If.
Leaf-stalks at and below mid-stem 1-7 cm, at middle (0.6-)0.7-1.3 mm diam., openly sulcate ventrally, the distal ones progressively shorter or subobsolete; pinnae 1-jug., ascending at a narrow angle to vertical, the stout, straight or distally retroarcuate rachis rounded dorsally, acutely keeled and shallowly bisulcate between Ifs ventrally, that of larger lvs 7-14 (-16.5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (1-)1.5-3.5(-4) mm; lfts of pinnae at and below mid-stem (45-)50-95-jug., decrescent at both ends of rachis, the moderately unequal first pair 0.5-2 mm distant from subulate paraphyUidia 0.5-1.5 mm, the blades sessile against rachis, in outline narrowly lanceolate or linear-oblong from semicordate base, abmptly apiculate, the longer ones (5-)6-13 x 1.3-2.4(-3) mm, (3.3-)3.5-6 times as long as wide, all smooth veinless above. beneath prominently bluntly 5-7-nerved from pulvinule, the forwardly displaced midrib dividing blade 1:1.5-2.5, shortly branched beyond middle, the anterior and posterior nerves on either side of it produced nearly to blade apex, the outer posterior ones successively shorter, the 1 -seriate setae of margin mostly forwardly subappressed and free through 0.5-1.3 mm, but some at times ffagelliform, spreading and longer.
Peduncles solitary (7-) 10-35 mm; capitula globose, without filaments ±9 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but commonly involved in extremely fine flagelliform cilia of bracts, these linear-oblanceolate 1.7-3 X 0.3-0.45 mm, glabrous dorsally, ciliate with flexuous setae to 1.5-2 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate and shorter; calyx paleaceous, glabrous except sometimes for a basal ring of setae, including the fine setiform fringe 2.2-4.5 mm, 4-cleft well below middle; corolla narrowly funnelform (2.7-)3-4 mm, the thickened cymbiform, dorsally pallid-carinate, extemally minutely papillose-puberulent lobes 0.9-1.3 X 0.5- 0.8 mm; filaments pink fading whitish, monadelphous through 2-3 mm, exserted 7-9.5 mm, dilated distally.
Pods ±2-10 per capitulum, sessile, when 2- or more-seeded oblong in profile 12-20 X 6-7 mm, the replum 0.35-0.6 mm wide, shallowly constricted between seeds, like the valves densely hispidor silky-setose with forwardly subappressed-ascending scaberulous setae to 1-2 mm, the ripe valves separating from replum and breaking up into free-falling biconvex indehiscent articles 4-6.5 mm long; seeds not seen fully ripe.
In cerrado on stony soils and in campo rupestre at foot of sandstone outcrops, 1000-1600 m, locally plentiful on Chapada dos Veadeiros within a radius of ±30 km of Alto Paraiso, lat. 13°45'-14°15'S in e.-centr. Goias, Brazil.-H. II-V. The close relationships of M. venatorum are discussed under M. pyrenea (p. 666) and its differential characters repeated in the Latin diagnosis.
Two varieties of the more distantly related M. hypoglauca occur near or within the south periphery of the range of M venatorum, but are smaller plants (seldom attaining 3.5 dm), with fewer (less than 50) pairs of leaflets per pinna, and geminate peduncles mostly axillary to a coeval leaf.
399.
Mimosa pyrenea Taubert, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 21: 430.
1896.—"Habitat in montibus Serra dos Pyreneos: ULE n. 2854—Flor. m. Aug."— Holotypus, ^B; no isotypus found at HBG or K in 1984; probable isotypi, Ule 102 in hb. Glaziov.,
P! K\-Ule 2852, HBG! may be an isotypus misnumbered.
M. concinna Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 404.
1875, nom. illeg. & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 337, descr. ampliat.
1876.—"Habitat ad Corego de Feragua [=Jeragua, 15°45'S, 49°20'W], provinciae Goyaz: Burchell n. 7445; Pohl; ad Rio Maranhao [±14°05'S, n.-e. of Goianesia] ejusdem provinciae: BurcheU n. 7563."—Lectotypus, Burchell 7563, K (hb. Hook.)!; isotypus, GH!; syntypi, Pohl 1210, W (sterilis)! Burchell 7445, K! =.iM. virgula Bameby. — Non M. concinna Willdenow, 1806.
M. loeseneriana Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem.3b): 183.
1906exparte, nom. nud.—"Serra Dourada et Serra do Arruda, Goyaz, [Glaziou]21050 [exclus.
21050a, quae = M. xanthocentra subseric^^]."-Specimina authent.,
+B = F Neg. 1419\ K! P! M. pyrenea Glaziou, 1906: 184, nom. nud.—"Corumba, dans le campo, Goyaz, n* 27057."—Specimina authent.,
C! G! K! M! P! S! Slender erect subshrubs from knotty xylopodium, the simple or distally few-branched stems attaining 7-12 dm, at base 2-4 mm diam., in age brittle and proximally defoliate, densely strigose throughout, like the broad stiff pinna-rachises, with appressed tapering setae, these to ± 1 mm long below the infforescence, longer and silkyffagelliform distally, the very numerous and small, coriaceous, subvertically imbricate lfts facially glabrous, setulose only around thick stramineous margin, the loose open pseudoracemes of globose capitula usually bracteate by diminished lvs, these distally shorter than the subtended peduncle or subobsolete.
Stipules erect firm, lanceolate or Unear-attenuate 3-6.5 X 0.5-1 mm, dorsally strigose, glabrous within, persistent.
Leaf-stalks at and below mid-stem not over 4 mm including pulvinus, that of distal or sometimes of all lvs essentially 0; pinnae 1-jug., their rachis in lvs below infforescence 4.5-9(-10) cm, rounded dorsally, ventrally carinate between excavated interfoliolar sulci, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 55-90-jug., slightly decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair close to pulvinus and subequilong, those toward mid-rachis Unear-oblong or narrowly lance-elUptic from obtusely semicordate base, apiculate at apex, to 3-6 x 0.7-1.2 mm, 3.3-5.5 times as long as wide, on upper face pminose, on lower face 5-6-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric or forwardly displaced to divide blade 1:2, the primary nerve on each side of midrib produced nearly to blade apex, the posterior ones shorter, the 1-seriate setulae of margin free for 0.1-0.6 mm and subappressed.
Peduncles solitary 10-28 mm; capitula without filaments 7.5-9 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, but the 4-carinate, minutely papillose-puberulent ff-buds sometimes no longer than filamentous ffagelliform cilia of bracts, these linear-oblanceolate ±2.5 X 0.4-0.5 mm, dorsally glabrous, ciliate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones smaller and staminate; calyx paleaceous 2.2-3 mm, 4-cleft to below middle into deeply setiform-decompound lobes; corolla narrowly funnelform 3.1-3.7 mm, the thick-textured cymbiform, dorsally pallid-carinate lobes 1-1.4 X 0.6-0.8 mm; filaments monadelphous through 0.8-1.8 mm, exserted 5-7 mm.
Pods ± 3 - 10 per capitulum, sessile, piano-compressed, when well fertilized 3(-4)-seeded, in profile oblong, undulately constricted between seeds, attaining 20-25 X 5-6 mm but by abortion of ovules shorter, sometimes broadly elliptic 1-seeded, the forwardly appressed-setose replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, the papery valves hispid-pilose with ascending, simply tapering or ffagelliform, scaberulous setae 1-2.5 mm; dehiscence as in M. venatorum; seeds not seen.
In stony or sandy campo, sometimes at the gallery-brejo interface, 800-1000 m, known only from Sas. dos Pirineus and Dourada in s.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-n (I-)IV-VIII. 400.
Mimosa callithrix Malme, Ark. Bot. 23A(13): 50.
1931.-"[BrazU.
Mato Grosso:] Serra da Chapada, Cascata grande pr. Buriti, in mpibus arenariis apricis, 8.
VI. 1903 ([PI.
Itin.
RegneU.] II: s.n.,
fforens)."—Holotypus, S! = NYNeg.
11847.
M. dammeriana Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 183.
1906, nom. nud.-"Matto Grosso, pres Fazenda do Cip6, Minas, no. 19136."
— Spma authent.,
K! P (labelled "(Minas) Matto Grosso")!—See comment below.
Erect unarmed shrubs to 1.5-2 m tall with defoliate trunks to 2 cm diam. and simple or subcorymbosely few-branched stems, these together with short robust petioles and back oflong pinnarachises densely silky-setose with basally dilated and pubemlent, distaUy tapering-ffageUiform and smooth, pallidly lutescent setae to 2-5 mm, the young foliage and immature capitula silky-lanate, the firm brown-olivaceous, continuously callous-marginate lfts discolorous, a little paler beneath, on both faces finely strigose with slender, forwardly appressed setae 0.5-1 mm from a scarcely dilated, stellately branched base, the globose capitula bome in the axil of coeval or hysteranthous lvs in a short terminal, simple or subcorymbose pseudoraceme emergent from foliage only in praefforation.
Stipules firm erect lanceolate 6-14 x 1.5-2.5 mm, dorsally silkysetose, brown glabrous within, early caducous.
Leaf-stalks including hard obese pulvinus 10- 18 X 1.5-2.6 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (7.5-) 10-18 cm, the interfoliolar segments 2^.5 mm; lfts 35-48-jug., scarcely graduated, the first pair 1-2 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 1-1.5 mm sometimes concealed in setae, the blades narrowly oblong or eUiptic-oblong from broadly obtusangulate or shallowly semicordate base, deltately apiculate, the larger ones 11-22 X 3-5 mm, 3.7-4.6 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 3—4-nerved from pulvinule, the simple brownish midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2-3, the slender, sometimes scarcely perceptible, inner posterior nerve expiring well beyond mid-blade, the outer ones much shorter, the corneous rim with slender 1-seriate, narrowly ascending ffagelliform setae 2-3.5 mm.
Peduncles solitary 2-4.5 cm; capitula without filaments 8.5-9.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis clothed in fine ffagelliform bracteal setae: receptacle setose; bracts elliptic-oblanceolate ±3.5 X 0.5-0.8 mm, the blade densely silkycomose dorsally with ffagelliform setae to ±2-3 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones functionally staminate; calyx paleaceous glabrous 3^.5 mm, the narrowly campanulate tube 1.5-2 mm, the lobes decompound at least half-way into lustrous setae; corolla subcylindric 4.5-6 mm, the tube glabrous, the firm livid, narrowly ovate cymbiform lobes 1-1.5 x 0.6-0.7 mm, densely puberulent or setulose-puberulent dorsally; filaments pink, monadelphous through 1.5-2 mm, exserted ±6.5 mm; ovary pilosulous.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) to five per capitulum, sessile, in profile undulately linear 17^5 x 7.5- 9 mm, 2-5-seeded, the shaUowly constricted replum ±0.8 mm wide, the valves coUiculate immediately over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely silky-pUose with forwardly ascending tapering, at least basally scaberulous setae to 1.5-2.5 mm, the valves at length separating into free-falling articles; seeds not seen.
This as yet incompletely known mimosa is distinguished among relatives with long paleaceous calyx and filaments connate around the ovary by the great length of the pinna-rachises, relatively large coarse leaffets, short pseudoracemose or corymbiform infforescence, and especially by setae scabrous-ramulose at base, the slender ones that clothe each face of the leaffets appearing proximally stellate.
Its nearest sympatric ally, M. polycephala var. taxifolia, differs in its effuse pyramidal infforescence of many capitula rising far above the foliage and in leaflets glabrous except for marginal setae.
Allopatric M. venatorum and M. papposa have smaller, narrower leaflets, and M. petiolaris, with which Malme compared M. callithrix in the protologue, seems yet further removed by its few-leaved stems, long slender petioles, facially glabrous leaflets, and virgate efoliate pseudoraceme.
I have seen in addition to the type of M. callithrix only two approximate topotypes (Mori 16763, 16807, NY) and the specimens cited in synonymy under M. dammeriana Glaziou, nom. nud. The latter was recorded in Glaziou's Liste from Minas Gerais, but the attribution is almost certainly incorrect.
The piece of Glaziou 19136 in the Paris museum lacks the dated hand-written field-label that commonly accompanies a specimen collected by Glaziou himself, and moreover consists of decapitated flowering stems quite uncharacteristic of Glaziou's usually careful and complete preparations.
It is likely that the collection was acquired by Glaziou from a perhaps amateur collector and originated, not as the label would have it from a Mato Grosso in Minas Gerais, but from the state of Mato Grosso.
So closely does Glaziou 19136 resemble the type of M. callithrix in every detail that I suspect it may also have been collected on Chapada dos Guimaraes.
401.
Mimosa thermarum Bameby, sp. nov., M. radulae et propius ejus var. imbricatae habitu virgato, caule confertim foliato, calyceque paleaceo manifeste aflinis, sed pube e setis pulchre infra mediam scaberrimo-subplumosis foUoUsque simul magis numerosis (26-35-jugis usque) ac eveniis diversa, a M. diversipila quoad pubem simili sed hucusque tantum in Paraguaia et Argentina limitropha obvia foliolomm numero, ambitu necnon venatione, pedunculis duplo longioribus et praesertim calyce paleaceo (nec obsoleto) longius distans. — Brazil.
Goias: Sa. das Caldas, mun. Caldas Novas, 9.
VII.1976 (fl), G. Hatschbach 38767.- Holotypus, MBM 46744; isotypi, HBG, NY.
Virgate subshrubs attaining 15-20 dm, the stems clothed distally with loosely refracted sessile lvs separated by intemodes ±1-2 cm and passing upward abruptly into a pseudoraceme or few-branched efoliate panicle of globose capitula rising ±1.5-2 dm above developed foliage, the stems distally and especially all axes of inflorescence densely loosely silky-pilose with slender, proximally scabemlous, distally flagelliform setae to ±2-2.5 mm, the dorsal face and margin of the dull olivaceous concolorous, extemally veinless lfts similarly setose but their ventral face more finely strigulose with almost smooth subappressed hairs.
Stipules firm erect, Unear-attenuate 5.5-7 X 0.5-0.7 mm, densely setose dorsally, deciduous.
Leaf-stalks reduced to hard pulvinus concealed by setae and not over 2 mm long; pinnae 1-jug., the axis of each 3.5-6.5 cm, the interpinnal segments 1.5-2 mm; lfts 26-35- jug., decrescent only at each end of rachis, the blades narrowly oblong from semicordate base, apiculate at apex, those near mid-rachis 5-9 x 1.3-1.9 mm, 3.8-4.7 times as long as wide, the marginal nerve continuous but very narrow and slenderly setose-ciliate, the venation fully immersed on both faces or the midrib faintly emergent dorsally at tip of blade.
Peduncles solitary, at anthesis 15-20 mm; capitula without filaments ±7 mm diam, moriform, but the 4-sulcate, apically pubemlent fl-buds a little shorter than the bracteal setae, the bracts linear-oblanceolate ±2 mm, beyond middle densely barbate dorsally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, many fimctionaUy staminate; calyx paleaceous ±2 mm, cleft nearly to base into 4 setiform-decompound lobes; coroUa narrowly funnelform or subcylindric 2.5-2.9 mm, the indurate cymbiform lobes ±1 X 0.55 mm, keeled dorsally; filaments pink, monadelphous through ± 1 mm, exserted only 3 mm; pod unknown.
On stony soils in campo cerrado subject to fire, near 700-800 m, known only from Sa. das Caldas, near 17°45'S in s.-e. Goias, BrazU.-Fl.
VIIVIII(-?).
Mimosa thermarum resembles M. radula, and especially its var. imbricata, in virgate habit and paleaceous calyx, but differs in more numerous and smaller, essentially veinless leaflets, and in its indumentum of subplumose setae.
The indumentum suggests kinship to M. lanuginosa, a member of ser. Polycephalae v^hich is unmistakably different in 3-11 (not 26-35) pairs of larger, dorsally 3-5-nerved leaffets.
The coincidence of plumose setae and virgate life-form suggests kinship to M. diversipila, remotely allopatric in Paraguay and northeastern Argentina, but this differs fundamentally in its obsolete calyx and is referred herein to a different subseries.
402.
Mimosa lanuginosa Glaziou ex Burkart, Darwiniana 13(2-4): 379.
1964.—Typus infra sub var. lanuginosa indicatur.
Virgately erect subshrubs from xylopodium, (6-)8-16 dm, the simple or distally branched stems arising each year or sometimes enduring (if not burnt) into a second season, when young densely clothed from base to infforescence with short sessile spreading-recurved lvs (in var. some proximal lvs distinctly petiolate), proximally defoliate in age, the young stems, lf-stks and axes of infforescence densely silky-pilose-tomentose with fine, arborescently branched setae, those of stem and pedicels always ffagelliform, silky and to (1-)2-4.5 mm, those of white-silky or -velvety lfts sometimes shorter, the vesture often tarnished in age, the infforescence a well exserted, simple pseudoraceme or narrow panicle of globose capitula.
Stipules Unear-attenuate or setiform, 4-9 X 0.3-0.6 mm, densely setose externally, early dry caducous, absent from many specimens.
Leaf-stalks aU reduced to the pulvinus or (var. raduliformis) in some lvs to 2.5-5 cm; pinnae 1-jug., the axis of each commonly less than 3, rarely to 8 cm, the interfoliolar segments 2-8 mm; lfts mostly 3-5-, rarely to 7-11- jug., subaccrescent distally, the first pair close to pulvinus and its anterior member diminutive, all in outline obliquely lanceolate to oblong or subdimidiately ovate-elliptic, obtuse apiculate, the larger ones of lvs near mid-stem (11-)13- 28(-33) X (3-)5-13(-l 8) mm, their anterior margin slightly convex, their posterior one broadly rounded, the blade (2-)3-5-nerved from pulvinule, the straight midrib dividing it 1:2.5-3, the other nerves all posterior, incurved-ascending and expiring within the scarcely dilated margin, all nerves immersed or almost so above, beneath bluntly prominulous.
Peduncles solitary (0.5-)l- 4 cm; capitula without filaments 9-13 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike and densely silky-pilose; bracts linear-oblanceolate or -attenuate 3 - 5 X 0.4-0.6 mm, dorsally at and above middle pilose with fine setae to 1-3 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, many lower ones commonly staminate; calyx paleaceous stramineous, 4-angulate 2.5-4.8 mm, glabrous except at very base, the lacerate-setiform lobes 1-1.8 mm; corolla (3.8-)4-6 mm, narrowly tubular-funnelform, the firm ovate cymbiform lobes 0.8-1.4 x 0.6 mm, extemally either glabrous or thinly puberulent at tip; filaments pink, monadelphous through 2-2.5 mm, exserted 6-7.5 mm.
Pods few per capitulum, sessile and usually embedded in sterile ffs, potentially 3- but mostly only 1-2-seeded, in profile oblong or oblong-elUptic 7-14 x 4-5 mm, the replum 0.2-0.35 mm wide, the papery lowconvex valves densely silky-pilose overall with loosely ascending subfiliform cream-colored silky setae to ± 3 mm, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into indehiscent articles; seeds not seen well-preserved.
Mimosa lanuginosa is visually and tactually notable for the soft silky or plushlike, pallid indumentum that clothes the stems and leaves, a vesture unique in ser. Polycephalae.
It is closely related, nevertheless, to vicariant M. radula and its sympatric vars. imbricata and radulina, with which it shares a wandlike, densely foliate stem and the paleaceous calyx of the series.
When Burkart described M. lanuginosa as a member of ser. Lepidotae (sec.
Calothamnos of this revision) he admitted that its genetic affinity lay in the direction of ser. 'Meticulosae,' from which it was technically excluded by the character of arborescent hairs and by lack of a strong marginal nerve on the leaffets.
This nerve, however, is in effect present, though not very pronounced and concealed by dense pubescence.
Burkart noted that some hairs of M (Meticulosae) radula bear toward the base small emergent cells that prefigure the arborescent ramification seen in M. lanuginosa, and the difference is more in degree than in kind.
Similar scabemlous hairs are now known to occur in several related taxa of ser. Polycephalae, and seem clearly homologous with branched hairs of M. lanuginosa.
It is high time to abandon a typological concept which subverts classification according to genetic affinity.
This has become more urgent and inevitable with the discovery of M. lanuginosa var. raduliformis, in which the arborescent trichomes of M. lanuginosa are associated with the leaf-formula and spiciform infforescence of M. radula, and of a second species of this series, M. thermarum, also pubescent with branched hairs.
Typical M. lanuginosa resembles M. radula var. imbricata in having all leaves sessile against the stem, but it has only 4-5 (not 7-16) pairs of leaffets in longer pinnae.
The poorly documented var. raduliformis resembles in leaf-formula and some distinctly petiolate lower leaves the relatively scarce M. radula var. radula.
Key to varieties of M. lanuginosa I. Lvs all sessile; rachis of pinnae 4-30 mm; lfts (3-)4-5-jug.; capitula elevated on peduncle (1-)2- 4(-5) cm; common in basin of rio S. Bartolomeu in Distrito Federal and local in adj. Goias. .. 402a. var. lanuginosa (p. 670).
1.
Lvs toward base of stem (deciduous by mid-anthesis) petiolate, the lf-stks 2.5-5 cm; rachis of pinnae 3-8 cm; lfts 7-11 pairs; peduncles 5-9 mm; local in s.-w. comer of Distrito Federal.
.
402b. var. raduliformis (p. 670).
402a. Mimosa lanuginosa Glaziou ex Burkart var. lanuginosa.
M. lanuginosa Burkart, 1964, I.e., fig. 4, lam. 1, sens. str.—".
.
.
Goyaz, Corrego do Brejo, dans le campo, Glaziou 21.082, II-III. 18 "-Holotypus, collected 9.
V. 1885 (ff), SI (seen in Burkart, I.e., lam. 1!); isotypi, +B = FNeg.
14171 C! F! = FNeg.
54884, IAN! M! NY! P! RB! S! Mimosa lanuginosa Glaziou, 1906: 184, nom. nud. (but fls improbably "bleues"); sensu Lucas & Synge, The lUCN Red Data Book 283.
1978.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In cerrado and campo limpo, often on red sandy soils, 750-1100 m, locally plentiful in the upper basin of rio S. Bartolomeu, within a radius of some 30 km of central BrasUia, D.F.,
extending w. in the Distrito to the sources of rio Descoberto, and outside the Distrito w. to the head of rio Commba, and s. to the Contraforte Geral in s.-e. Goias (mun. Ipameri).—Fl.
IV-VIII, the defoliate sticklike stems sometimes regenerating in the wet season and ffowering a second time.
402b. Mimosa lanuginosa Glaziou ex Burkart var. raduliformis Bameby, var. nov., a var. lanuginosa foliis inferioribus nonnuUis petiolatis (nec omnibus sessilibus), foliolis foliorum omnium magis numerosis, cujusque pinnae 7- 11 (nec 3-5)-jugis, necnon capitulomm pedunculo abbreviato minus quam 1 cm longo, his notulis M. radulam simulans, diversa.— Brazil.
Distrito Federal: entre Gama e rio Corumba [i.e., near s.-w. comer of Distrito], 2.
VII. 1964 (ff), A. P. Duarte & A. Mattos 462. - Holotypus, BRADE 34149; isotypi, NY, RB, UB.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In stony campo on westem exposure, probably near 1000 m, known only from the type-locality in extreme s.-w. Distrito Federal, Brazil.
This interesting plant is in many respects intermediate between M. radula sensu lato and M. lanuginosa, to which I have subordinated it on account of the pronounced arborescent indumentum.
403.
Mimosa radula Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 377.
1841, sensu hie ampliato.—Typus infra sub var. radula indicatur.
Stout, in most seasons functionally herbaceous subshrubs with 1-3, rarely several stems erect or stiffly assurgent from xylopodium, either simply virgate or beyond middle paniculately fewbranched, attaining (7-)10-16(-20) dm, clothed from base to leaffess or proximally leafy-bracteate, far-exserted pseudoracemose infforescence either with crowded and recurved or more distant and ascending or outwardly curved lvs, the axes of stem and infforescence and the dorsal rib of pinnae at once densely pubemlent and either hispid or silky-pilose with spreading, retrorse, or partly ascending, smooth or scabemlous setae to 0.6-3.5(-4) mm, the subconcolorous lfts duU brownish-olivaceous except when concealed by vesture, pilosulous on both faces (except var. semitonsa), palmately veined beneath.
Stipules firm erect, linear or narrowly lanceolate 4-11 x 0.4-2 mm, setose dorsaUy, glabrous within, early dry deciduous.
Leaves either aU sessile against stem or some lower and median ones petiolate, the petioles when present progressively shorter upward along stem; pinnae 1-jug., 2-21 cm, the longer interfoUolar segments 2-22 mm, the lfts sometimes more crowded in upper than in lower lvs; lfts 4-18(-22)-jug., decrescent proximally but scarcely so distally, the first pair contiguous to pulvinus and the anterior member of the first or of the first two pairs smaller than its fellow, sometimes reduced to a paraphyllidium, the blades otherwise lanceolate to semi-ovate or subdimidiately cordate, obtuse or acute, the larger ones of a plant (10-) 12-55 x 3-30 mm, all at base rounded on proximal and cuneate on distal side, (2-)3-6-nerved from pulvinule, the displaced midrib dividing blade 1:2.5-6, the nerve on its anterior side either submarginal or obsolescent, those on posterior side incurved-ascending, in broader lfts weakly brochidodrome within the continuous setose margin, the venation pallid and raised on lower face only, there sometimes obscured by vesture.
Axis of inflorescence 1.5-6 dm, exserted from developed lvs 1.5-3.5(-4) dm, the solitary peduncles (0.5-)l-4 cm; capitula without filaments (7-)8-12(-14) mm diam., prior to anthesis usually conelike and pallid-setose, but bracts sometimes hardly as long as the lustrous 4-angulate, glabrous or microscopically pubemlent ff-buds, the capitula then submoriform; bracts linear-oblanceolate or -spatulate (2.5-)3- 5 X 0.2-0.5 mm, beyond middle densely setose dorsally and setose-ciliate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones commonly staminate and smaller than the rest; calyx paleaceous, glabrous except sometimes for a ring of setae at very base, obtusely tetragonal (1.8-)2.5^.2(-4.8) mm, the four deeply lacerate or setiform-decompound lobes 0.7-1.8 mm; corolla 3-5.2(-6) mm, narrowly vase-shaped or when long subtubular, the narrowly ovate cymbiform subcomeous, dorsally lustrous lobes 0.7-1.3 x ±0.4 mm; filaments pink or purplish, monadelphous through 1.5-2.5 mm, exserted 5.5-8.5 mm.
Pods (not weU known) usually many per capitulum but not forming a hard ball, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong, cuneate at both ends, ±12-16 x 4.5-5 mm, 2-3-seeded, the replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, the papery valves ±0.15 mm thick at margins but thinner and low-convex over each seed, densely hispid-pilose overall with fine tapering or at base strongly dilated, forwardly curved setae to 1-3 mm, the ripe valves separating from replum and breaking up into free-falling, individually indehiscent articles 4-5 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
Mimosa radula may be recognized by this syndrome of characters: multifoliate virgate stems, mostly one meter tall or more, passing upward into an efoliate pseudoraceme or few-branched panicle; cauline indumentum composed of setae either perfectly smooth or scaberulous, but not arborescently plumose; leaffets relatively few (4- 20 pairs) per pinna and relatively ample (some over 1 cm long); and the paleaceous calyx and monadelphous filaments of its series.
Native to small portions of its extensive planaltine range of dispersal are M. virgula, almost a microphyllidious version of it, which has leaffets of much the same number but much less than one centimeter long; and the habitally similar M. thermarum and M. lanuginosa, which differ in arborescently plumose cauline setae.
The virgate growth-habit and leaf-formula of M. radula are deceptively repeated, at the eastem margins of the Brazilian Planalto, by members of ser. Brevipedes, but these have very small or obsolete, nonpaleaceous calyx and free filaments.
In 1875-1876 Bentham had seen ten miscellaneous examples of the species here described as M. radula sensu lato, and interpreted them as representing three distinct but related species, one of them with a variety, of which the critical features were length of petioles, number and size of leaffets, and length of peduncles.
With the advantage of eight times as many collections, and consequently a much more accurate notion of the dispersal of individual variations and the constancy of correlations between them, the modem student cannot accept M. radula, M. calycina, M. imbricata and its var. multijuga, and M. dimidiata at the rank to which Bentham assigned them.
The characters emphasized by Bentham have tumed out to be independently variable, leaffet-size and -number are less exact than could be predicted a century ago, and some supposed discontinuities have been filled in by intermediate states then not known.
In place of Bentham's five taxa I find it possible to recognize herein five varieties of one species M. radula, three of them incorporating all Bentham's material, and two newly described.
Key to varieties of M. radula 1.
Lower lvs (caveat: absent from specimens severed at mid-stem) petioled, the petiole 0.5-14 cm; larger lfts either more than 20 x 8 mm or glabrous ventrally.
2.
Lfts of each pinna of larger lvs 4-7-jug.; the lfts of almost all lvs ample, to 2.5-5.5 x 0.9-2.5 cm.
3.
Stems clothed with retrorsely subappressed setae mostly less than 1 mm and densely minutely scaberulous from base to tip; rachis of longer pinnae 5-21 cm; local in s.-e. Goias and adj. Minas Gerais 403a. var. radula (p. 672).
3.
Stems softly pilose with fine weak spreading, almost smooth setae to 2-4 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 1.5-7 cm; local in Distrito Federal, Brazil and s.-centr. Goias.
403d. var. radulina (p. 673).
2.
Lfts of each pinna of larger lvs 7-16-jug.; larger lfts of lvs at and below mid-stem attaining 2-4.5 x 0.8-2.5 mm, but of upper lvs often no more than 13-20 x 4-9 mm.
4.
Ventral face of lfts setulose-pilosulous; interruptedly widespread from s.-centr. Minas Gerais and e.-centr. S. Paulo to n. Mato Grosso do Sul 403b. var. calycina (p. 672).
4.
Ventral face of lfts glabrous; local at 1000-1400 m on Sas. dos Pireneus and Dourada in s.-centr. Goias 403c. var. semitonsa (p. 673).
1.
Lower lvs sessile or almost so, the petiole not over 1 cm, in nearly all lvs suppressed; lfts of all lvs relatively many and small, in each pinna of larger lvs 8-18(-22)-jug. and not over 18 x 5.5 mm, always pubescent on upper face; common in Distrito Federal, Brazil, thence n. in Goias to head of rio Parana, and s.-e. to Sa. dos Cristais and adj. Minas Gerais (Paracatu) 403e. var. imbricata (p. 674).
403a. Mimosa radula Bentham var. radula.
M. radula Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens. str.—"Brazil, Pohl.'\ the locality particularized in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 335, t. 84.
1876: "in provincia Goyaz inter Corumba et Rio S. Marcos."
— Holotypus, Pohl d.l371 = 2536, K!; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 13111 F! M! NY! W! M. radula sensu Bentham, 1875: 404.
Stems erect or stiffly assurgent from xylopodium 1-1.5 m, densely leafy from near base (where ±6-10 mm diam.) to middle or beyond, the cauline intemodes and lf-stks at once puberulent and retrorsely scabrous with densely scaberulous setae to ± 1 mm, the lfts subequally hispidulous on both faces, the peduncles crinitesilky with ffagelliform setae; petiole of basal and subbasal lvs 6-14 cm x 1.4-2 mm, that of median and upper lvs progressively short, of the uppermost ones subobsolete; rachis of longer pinnae 5-21 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (except in some reduced distal lvs) 15-22 mm; lfts (4-)5-7-jug., very obliquely ovate or semicordate obtuse 3-5.5 x (1.3-) 1.7-3 cm, ± 1.8-2.1 times as long as wide, palmately (5-)6- nerved and divided ± 1:3-6 by displaced midrib; peduncles subobsolete to 1.5 cm; capitula without filaments 11-14 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelUce; bracts 3.5-5.5 x 0.2-0.35 mm; calyx 2.8-3.3 mm; corolla ±3.7-4.1 mm. • In campo cerrado near 1000-1050 m, apparently local, known (from exact data) only from upper Paranaiba valley in extreme s.-e. Goias (n. of Catalao; s.-e. of Campo Alegre; rio Sao Marcos) and adj. Minas Gerais (Sa. dos Oculos n. of Patrocmio).-Fl.
II-III(-?).
Diagnostic characters ascribed to M. radula sens. str. by Bentham (1876: 297) in his key to the Meticulosae with paleaceous calyx were developed leaf-stalks, relatively few and large leaflets, and subsessile capitula.
These characters are now known not to form a stabilized syndrome: plants having the foliage of M. radula (and incidentally its scaberulous setae) can have pedunculate capitula and others, referable to M. calycina by leaffet-size and -number, may have petioles well developed in lower leaves and subsessile capitula.
The var. radula now emerges as one extreme of a nearly continuous spectrum of variation, and cannot be specifically detached from the commoner vars. calycina and imbricata.
403b. Mimosa radula Bentham var. calycina (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. calycina Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 377.
1841.- "BrazU, Pohl; Minas Geraes, Claussen."
— Lectotypus, Pohl d.l402 = 1364, from Curralinho, Goias, K!; isotypi, F! M! NY! W!; syntypi, Claussen s.n.,
G! NY! M. dimidiata Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 378.
1841.— "BrazU, PohU\ The locality particularized in Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 336.
1876: "in Serra dos Montes Claros provinciae Goyaz [w. of Luziania near s.-w. comer of D. F.]."
Holotypus, Pohl "1464, "probably an error for 7^65, K (hb. Hook.)!; isotypi, Pohl 1202 = d.l465, NY! W! and s.n.,
+B = F Neg. 6775! M. calycina sensu Bentham, 1875: 404, 1876: 335.
M. dimidiata sensu Bentham, 1875: 404.
Closely resembling var. radula, but stems hispid-pilose with erect or widely loosely descending setae to 1.5-4 mm and scabemlous only at base or smooth; lf-stk of basal lvs 1-9 cm, that of median lvs shorter, of upper lvs obsolete; rachis of longer pinnae 8-21 cm, its longer interfoliolar segments 6-20 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 8-15-jug., the blades obliquely ovate or semicordate, often abruptly apiculate, the longer ones oflower lvs usually 2-4.6 x (0.9-) 1-2.6 cm, 1.3- 4.6 times as long as wide, but those of upper, rarely of all lvs only 13-20 x 4-9 mm, all dorsally 5-6-nerved from pulvinule; peduncles (0.5-)l-4 cm; capitula without filaments 9-14 mm diam., prior to anthesis either conelike or moriform; calyx (2.2-)2.5^ mm; corolla 3-5 mm.
In cerrado and campo sujo, 600-1050 m, interruptedly widespread from s. Sa. do Espinha^o in s.-centr. Minas Gerais (Sa. do Cipo; Lagoa Santa; Ouro Preto) s.-w. to e.-centr. S. Paulo (Mogi-mirim; S. Carlos), w. through s. Goias, mostly to the w. and s. of var. imbricata, to n. Mato Grosso do Sul.-H. I-V. In the light of collections that have accumulated since Bentham's monograph.
M radula var. calycina is seen to combine the stalked lower leaves of var. radula with leaffet-number of var. imbricata.
It differs further from var. radula in relatively smooth cauline setae and in smaller leaflets of most upper leaves, the size inversely correlated with number; but from var. imbricata it differs essentially only in well-petiolate lower leaves.
Small differences in ciliation of the leaflets and number of their primary nerves noted in Bentham's key no longer seem taxonomically significant.
The type of M. dimidiata had relatively narrow leaffets and is perhaps intermediate to var. imbricata.
403c. Mimosa radula Bentham var. semitonsa Bameby, var. nov., foliis imis saltem breviter petiolatis ab affini var. imbricata, foliolisque supra glabris ab omnibus speciei varietatibus diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: slope of Sa. dos Pirineus ±21 km e. of Pirenopolis, 1000 m, 13.1.1972 (ff), Irwin (with W. R. Anderson, Stieber & Lee) 34000.-Yiolotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, GH, K, LE, NY, P, R, RB, S, US. M. dolens sensu Glaziou, 1906: 178, ex parte (21077); non Vellozo.
Stems either simply virgate or narrowly paniculate distally, at and below middle hispidulous with spreading, minutely scaberulous setae less than 1 mm, silky-pilose distally with ffagelliform setae to 1-2.5 mm, the lfts glabrous above, sometimes on both faces; petiole of some lower lvs 1-3 cm, the middle and upper lvs subsessile; rachis of pinnae 2-9(-l 1) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (3-)4-10(-12) mm; lfts (5-)6- 10(-13)-jug., those oflower lvs larger than those of upper ones, all subdimidiately ovate-cordate, the larger ones 12-28 x (5-)6-12 mm, 2-2.5 times as long as wide, dorsally 4-6-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib dividing blade 1:3-5; peduncles (0.5-) 1.5-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments (7-)8-9 mm diam.; bracts 1.7-2.5 mm; calyx (1.7-)2-2.7 mm; corolla 3-4.1 mm.
In sandy cerrado and campo rupestre, 1000- 1400 m, locally common on the heights of Sas. dos Pirineus and Dourada, near 15°40'S in s.- centr. Goias.-Fl.
I-V. The var. semitonsa closely resembles the more distantly leafy states of var. imbricata, but is distinguished by ventrally glabrous leaffets, by shorter fforal bracts and consequently moriform immature capitula, and by dispersal in a wellknown focus of local endemism.
The shortly petiolate lowest leaves, not shown by every specimen of this inconveniently tall virgate subshrub, are intermediate in form between the obligately sessile leaves of var. imbricata and the emphatically stalked ones of vars. calycina and radula.
403d. Mimosa radula Bentham var. radulina Bameby, var. nov., inter var. imbricatam ac var. radulam quasi interludens, a priori foliolis paucijugis amplis foliisque nonnuUis inferioribus breviter sed manifeste petiolatis, ab altera, quoad foUolorum ambitum et magnitudinem comparabili, foliis secus caulem confertis plerisque sessilibus, pinnarum axi abbreviato 1.5-7 (nec 5-21) cm longo, foliolis 4-6 (nec 5-1 l)-jugis, caulisque pube e setis molUbus fere laevibus constanti abstans.— Brazil.
Goias: Sa. dos Pirineus 10 km e. of PirenopoUs, 1000 m, 15.1.1972 (ff), Irwin (with Anderson, Stieber & Lee) i^755.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, GH, K, LE, MBM, NY, P, R, S, US. Like var. imbricata in habit, markedly different in leaf-formula, the virgate stems 1.5-2 m. near base 4-7 mm diam., shaggy-pilose with spreading, sordid or lutescent hairs to 2-4 mm and clothed from base upward into the infforescence with sessile and some proximal short-petiolate lvs inserted at intervals of 1-4 cm, the longest petiole not over 3 cm, the ample lfts pilose on both faces; rachis of pinnae (1-)l .5-1 cm, the interfoliolar segments mostly 5-15 mm; lfts 4-6-jug., broadly semi-ovate-cordate, those of lvs at and below mid-stem 15-55 x 9-25 mm, 1.8-2.3 times as long as wide, the slender continuous margin with fine ascending setae to 1- 2.5 mm, dorsally 3-5-nerved from pulvinule; peduncles 12-35 mm; capitula without filaments 8-10 mm diam., prior to anthesis submoriform; bracts 3-4 x 0.4-0.5 mm; calyx 1.8-3 mm; corolla 3-4.4 mm.
On rocky hillsides and creek-banks in cerrado climax, 950-1000 m, local in Distrito Federal, Brazil (Cidade Ecletica; sources of rio Ponte Alta) and in the foothiUs of Sa. dos Pirineus in s.-centr. Goias.-H. I-II(-?).
The var. radulina resembles var. radula in low number and ample size of leaffets, which distinguish it sharply from var. imbricata and var. semitonsa.
It differs from var. radula in soft pilose cauline indumentum of almost smooth setae, and in materially shorter pinna-rachises.
The combination of short pinnae and few large leaflets is diagnostic within the species.
403e. Mimosa radula Bentham var. imbricata (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. imbricata Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 378.
1841.- "Brazil, Pohl", the locality particularized in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 336.
1876: ".
.
. in Serra dos Montes Claros et Serra dos Christaes provinciae Goyaz.
.
. ."—Holotypus, Pohl 1208 = d.l416, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1826; isotypi, NY! US! W!; presumed isotypus, Pohl s.n.,
M! = F Neg. 6757! M. imbricata var. (/?) multijuga Bentham in Martius, n. bras. 15(2): 336.
1876. —".
.
. cum forma typica in Serra dos Chrystaes: Pohl."
—Holotypus, Pohl 713 = d.l471, K (hb. Hook.,
nondum florens)! = NY Neg. 7527; isotypi, NY! W! M. paraizensis Taubert, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 21: 430.
1896.—"Habitat in ditione Tocantini superioris in campis ad Paraizo [=Alto Paraiso seu Veadeiros]: ULE n. 2824.-nor. m. Sept. [1892]."-Holotypus, +B; isotypus, HBG! = NY Neg. 11839.-Ule 1 ex "Paraizo" in hb. Glaziov. (P!) may be isotypic also.
M. eriophylla sensu Glaziou, 1906: 179 (21080, sterile, G! P!); non Bentham.
Stems commonly 2-3 erect or stiffly assurgent, simply virgate or paniculate distally, (7-) 10-15 dm, densely clothed from near base, where 3-6 mm diam., to efoliate or proximally leafy-bracteate pseudoraceme with sessile, usually crowded and recurved, sometimes more distant, ascending and outwardly arcuate lvs spaced 1-3 cm apart, like leafand infforescence-axes at once densely puberulent and either densely hispidor silky-pilose with spreading-incurved, subretrorse, or rarely ascending, smooth or at base microscopically scaberulous setae to (1-) 1.5-3.5 (-4) mm, the lfts pilosulous on both faces, palmately 3-5-nerved beneath; rachis of commonly retroarcuate and obliquely geotropic pinnae 2- 5.5(-8) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2- 5(-6) mm, often shorter in distal than in proximal lvs but sometimes subuniform the length of stem; lfts (7-)8-18(-22)-jug., all obliquely lanceolate or semi-ovate 9-18 x 3-5.5 mm, deltately acute, the midrib dividing blade 1:2.5-4.5; peduncles (1.5-)2-4 cm; capitula without filaments (7-)8-12 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike and pallid-setose or rarely submoriform; bracts (2.5-)3-5 X 0.3-0.5 mm; calyx 2.7- 4.2(-^.8) mm; corolla (3.5-)3.7-5.2(-6) mm.
In campo and open cerrado, often on red sandy soils, 900-1200 m, locally plentiful in s.-e. Goias, Brazil and Distrito Federal, s.-ward from sources of rio Parana (S. Joao da Alian9a; S. Gabriel de Goias) to Sa. de Facao (n.-e. of Catalao), within lat. 14°50'-l 8°S, thence extending feebly e. across Sa. da Tiririca into far w. Minas Gerais (Paracatu).-H. XII-III(-IV).
Being locally common in the cerrado of the Federal District and a tall, conspicuous wandlike plant impossible to overlook, var. imbricata is the most frequently collected and consequently the best known variety ofM. radula.
Leaves all sessile against the stem and leaffets at once relatively small (none over 2 cm long) and pubescent on upper face are the only discriminatory features that now seem to detach it from the rest of M. radula.
The var. semitonsa, with almost the same number and size of leaffets, has lower leaves petiolate and the leaffets themselves are glabrous above, while the other varieties have either fewer leaffets, or much larger leaffets, and when their leaf-formula is similar have obviously stalked lower leaves.
404.
Mimosa virgula Bameby, sp. nov., caule virgato foliis patulis reversisque abbreviatis infforescentiam usque confertim vestito, calyce paleaceo, leguminisque tam stmctura quam pube M. imbricatae manifeste affinis, sed foliis insigniter deminutis, pinnamm axi 8-20 (nec 20-55) mm foliolisque majoribus 2.5-5.5 (nec 9-19) mm longis inter se 0.4-1.5 (nec 2-5) mm semotis primo intuitu diversa. — Brazil.
Goias: Sa. dos Pireneus ±15 airline km n. of Commba de Goias, 1300 m, 14.
V.1973 (ff, fr), W. R. Anderson (with S. Hill, Reis dos Santos & Souza) 70292. —Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. M. microphylla Glaziou, BuU.
Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 184.
1906, nom. nud.—Non Poiret, Encycl. suppl. 1: 36.
1810.—"Morro do Abbade, pres MeiaPonte, GOIAS, No. 21056."-Specimina authent.,
+B = F Neg. 1420, F! G! K! P! M. concinna sensu Bentham, 1876: 337, ex parte (Burchell 7445), exclus. typ.
Functionally herbaceous subshrubs 8-11 dm with knotty xylopodium and (1-)2-several stiffly erect virgate, simple or distally few-branched stems densely clothed from base up to exserted efoliate or at base leafy-bracteate infforescence with short subhorizontal, widely ascending, or loosely retro-imbricate, 1 -jugate, spirally or above mid-stem often subopposite or pseudoverticillate lvs, the longer intemodes 6-15 mm, the axes of stem, pinnae and infforescence densely softly pilose with spreading-incurved, smooth or obscurely scaberulous pallid setae to 1.5-3.5 mm, the firm, closely imbricate, brownish-olivaceous often glaucescent lfts subconcolorous, either glabrous facially or thinly strigulose on either one face or on both, stiffly spreading-ciliate from narrow corneous margin, the simply pseudoracemose inflorescence exserted ±1-2 dm beyond all but bracteiform lvs.
Stipules setiform 4-6 x 0.2 mm, pectinately ciliate, early dry caducous.
Leafstalks reduced to pulvinus; axis of pinnae 8-20 (-22) mm, the interfoUolar segments 0.4-1.5 mm; lfts of each pinna 10-16-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the anterior member of first pair smaUer than its fellow, the blades of all lanceoblong or narrowly lance-ovate acute, the longest 2.5-5.5 X 0.7-1.5 mm, all smooth above, dorsaUy bluntly 4-nerved from pulvinule, the straight midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, flanked by an anterior and posterior nerve, the spreading, either stiff or soft cilia to (0.6-)0.8-1.5 mm.
Peduncles solitary but sometimes appearing pseudoverticillate, 2-3 cm; capitula globose, without filaments 7.5-9 mm diam., prior to anthesis submoriform, the microscopically puberulent-scabemlous fl-buds ± as long as cilia of bracts, these linear-oblanceolate 2.5-3 x 0.4-0.7 mm, ciUate distally with fine setae to ±0.6-1 mm; receptacle densely pilose;y/ow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones shorter than the rest and staminate; calyx paleaceous glabrous, obscurely 4-angulate 2.5-3 mm, cleft into four lacerate lobes 0.8-1.3 mm; corolla (3-)3.2-4 mm, narrowly funnelform, the narrowly ovate callous, purplish and involute lobes 1-1.3 x 0.6-0.7 mm; filaments pink or magenta, monadelphous through 1-1.5 mm, exserted 4-7 mm, dilated distally.
Pods ± 1- 5 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong or oblong-eUiptic 15-25 X 6-6.5 mm, mostly 2-4- seeded, the shallowly undulate replum ±0.5 mm wide, the papery valves low-convex over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely silkypilose with forwardly ascending fine flagelliform setae to ±1-2 mm, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling articles 4.5-7 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
On rock-strewn slopes and in campo rupestre associated with arenitic and metamorphic outcrops, 1000-1400 m, endemic to the peak and upper slopes of Sa. dos Pireneus, near 15°40'S in s.-centr. Goias, Brazil.-Fl.
I-IV. Mimosa virgula has the wandlike habit of closely related but more widespread and allopatric M. radula var. imbricata, and essentially the same flowers and fruits.
It is notably distinct, however, in the diminished foliage composed of sessile pinnae not more than 2 cm and leaflets less than 6 mm long. It appears to be a specialized, microphyllous derivative ofM. radula sensu lato.
Although described here for the first time, M. virgula was first discovered in the year 1819 by A. de Saint-Hilaire.
A small specimen of it collected by W. J. Burchell nine years later was mistaken by Bentham for the sympatric M. pyrenea.
It was next seen in 1894 by A.-F.-M. Glaziou, who recognized it as undescribed, but provided no more than an illegitimate name.
In modem times it has been collected repeatedly by H. S. Irwin, W. R. Anderson, J. M. Pires and others and, while narrowly restricted in range and habitat, is said to be locally frequent.
405.
Mimosa pseudoradula Glaziou [Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 186.
1906, nom. nud.] ex Bameby, sp. nov., foliolis amplis calyceque paleaceo M. radulae simillima, sed habitu virgiformi foliisque plerisque radicalibus vel caulinis paucis (5 usque) infra mediam plantam sparsis manifeste diversa.—Typus infra sub var. pseudoradula indicatur.
Functionally herbaceous subshrubs with 1-few simple stems (0.7-)l-2.5(-3) m stiffly erect from a carrotlike or amorphous xylopodium, leafy at base only or at l-4(-5) nodes distant not more than 3 dm from root-crown, passing upward into a simple wandlike lax pseudoraceme or strictly narrowly 1-4-branched panicle of globose capitula, the lower stems, lf-stks and corneous Iftmargins either hispid with spreading setae to 2- 5 mm or more shortly scabrous and gray-puberulent with ascending or subappressed trichomes less than 1.5 mm, the upper stems and axes of inflorescence either scabrous-hispidulous or silkypilose with shorter or finer, in one var. retrorse setae, the ample, firmly papery brown-olivaceous or glaucescent, subconcolorous lfts commonly all glabrous facially, the lower 1-2, rarely all, thinly setose dorsally.
Stipules firm, lanceolate or Unear-lanceolate 5-12 x 1-2 mm, very early dry and deciduous, absent from many mature specimens.
Leaf-stalks of subradical lvs 4- 26 cm, at middle 1-2 mm diam., rounded dorsally, openly shallowly sulcate ventrally, those of cauline lvs much shorter (not separately described further); pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of each 3.5-14 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 10- 22 mm; lfts 4-10(-l l)-jug., somewhat decrescent proximally, scarcely so distally, the first pair 3 - 7(-10) mm distant from pulvinus or from corneous conic paraphyllidia less than 1 mm, the anterior member less than half as long as the posterior, the proximal pairs of lfts lance-ovate or semi-ovate, the broad distal ones semi-cordate, all very obtuse, the larger blades 2-4.5(-5) X (0.8-)l-2.4(-2.7) cm, 1.8-2.8 times as long as wide, all palmately 5-7-nerved from broad wrinkled pulvinule, the excentric, gently incurved midrib dividing blade ± 1:2-4, the single primary nerve on its anterior side weak, the 3 ^ posterior ones incurved-ascending and weakly brochidodrome within the corneous margin, the secondary venulation usually weak and random, all nerves of mature blade immersed or almost so above, prominent beneath.
Peduncles always solitary 1-4.5 cm; capitula without filaments (7.5-)8-l 1 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike and silky-setose; bracts linear-oblanceolate or - spatulate 1.7-3.5 x 0.3-0.45 mm, densely setulose dorsally and ciUolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some or many of each capitulum staminate; calyx 1.8-3 mm paleaceous, divided to below middle into four lacerate scales, at base with a ring of fine setulae; corolla narrowly funnelform 3.2-4.8 mm, the firm yellowish cymbiform lobes 1.1-2 X 0.45-0.6 mm, glabrous or microscopically papillate extemally; filaments pink, monadelphous through 2-2.5 mm around ovary, exserted 6-9 mm.
Pods (poorly known) ±3-12 per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong 17-25 x 6-7.5 mm, 2-5-seeded, the replum ±0.5 mm wide, shallowly constricted, the stiffly papery valves coUiculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely hispid-pilose with widely ascending-incurved, tapering or flagelliform setae to 1.5-2.5 mm, the valves when ripe breaking up into free-falling indehiscent articles ± 5-7 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
Mimosa pseudoradula resembles the closely related M. radula in all details of flower and pod, as well as in outline and venation of the relatively ample leaflets, but differs greatly in habit of growth and disposition of the foliage.
Whereas the stem of M. radula is densely clothed up to the inflorescence with mostly sessile leaves, M. pseudoradula has only a few subradical long-petiolate leaves clustered on the xylopodium or at very base of stem; or has at best 1-5 distant, smaller and more shortly, but still evidently petiolate cauline leaves bome at distant nodes below middle of the plant, most of which consists of a virgate or narrowly paniculate inflorescence bare of leaves.
The two species next following, M. flavocaesia and M. cyclophylla, are similar in habit but differ much in details of foliage.
The plentiful modem collections of M. pseudoradula fall into well-differentiated pubescencetypes, here recognized as varieties.
That most prevalent in Distrito Federal, particularly on the Sobradinho and Torto forks of rio S. Bartolomeu, has almost glabrous or pubemlent and scabemlous stems often but not always bearing a few cauline leaves, and leaflets margined with a single file of forwardly appressed setae.
Outside the Distrito this form, which is described below as var. detonsa, is known from only one collection on the upper Parana near S. Joao da Alian^a.
Less common in the Distrito, but occasionally sympatric there with var. detonsa, is var. pseudoradula, distmguished by long-setose lower stem and leaf-stalks and by elongate setae spreading at wide angles from the leaflet-margin.
This extends further outside the Distrito than var. detonsa, south-westward to the Descoberto valley and north to Chapada dos Veadeiros and Niquelandia in central Goias.
Its range contains and greatly exceeds that of var. detonsa.
On Serra dos Cristais in southwestern Goias M. pseudoradula is represented by a population similar to var. detonsa in indumentum of lower stem and leaflet-margin but differing in leaves more definitely radical, shorter, and composed of one or two less pairs of leaflets in each pinna.
This differs further from var. detonsa in having the setae of the primary inflorescence-axis sharply retrorse and is thereby easily separated as an endemic var. crystallites.
An intermediate type, having the retrorse indumentum of inflorescence and shortly petiolate leaves of var. crystallites but the leafletnumber of var. detonsa, is known from two collections to the west of the Distrito and is with some misgiving described as a distinct taxon, var. anapolitana.
Key to varieties of M. pseudoradula Vesture of lower stem and lf-stks strigulose, scaberulous, or almost wanting, the longer trichomes narrowly ascending, or less than 1 mm, or both; marginal setae oflfts narrowly ascending or subappressed, free distally through ±0.5-1.5 mm; e.-centr. Goias s. through Distrito Federal to s.-e. Goias.
2.
Lvs of most plants mostly radical and cauline, the latter usually 2—4(-5), rarely 0-1 in number; lfstks of radical lvs mostly 7-26 cm; lfts of longer pinnae 6-9(-l l)-jug.; central axis of inflorescence finely setose with forwardly appressed or ascending trichomes; centr. Distrito Federal n. to sources of rio Parana in e.-centr. Goias, and s.-ward just outside D.F. to Luizania 405a. var. detonsa (p. 677).
2.
Lvs of almost all plants strictly radical, rarely 1-2 small cauline; lf-stks 3-8(-l 1) cm; central axis of inflorescence retrorsely setose.
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 9-11-jug.; Corumba valley in s.-e. Goias. .. 405b. var. anapolitana (p. 677).
3.
Lfts of longer pinnae 4-7-jug.; Sa. dos Cristais in s.-e. Goias 405c. var. crystallites (p. 677).
Vesture of lower stem and lf-stks hispid-pilose with subhorizontal setae to 2-5 mm; marginal setae of lfts widely spreading, free distally through 1.5-4 mm; sympatric with var. detonsa (although in the common range rarer), extending w. to the Descoberto valley and (doubtfully) n. to headwaters of rios Maranhao and Trairas in centr. Goias 405d var. pseudoradula (p. 678).
405a. Mimosa pseudoradula Glaziou ex Bameby var. detonsa Bameby, var. nov., a var. pseudoradula praesertim caule inferiori, petiolis foliolommque margine setis parvis minimis nulUsve indutis, nec longe patule hispido-setosis diversa. — Brazil.
Distrito Federal: Chapada da Contagem ±20 km e. of Brasilia, on limestone, 700-1000 m, 16.
VIII.1964 (fl, fr), Irwin & Soderstrom 5790.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, K, LE, NY, R, US. M. harmsiana Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 185.
1906, nom. nud.—"Entre Chico Lobo et Cabeceiras do Rio Torto [Distrito Federal, Brazil, Glaziou] 21071. "
-Speciminaauthent.,
+B = FNeg.
1414, C! K! M! P! S! Characters as given in key to varieties.
In cerrado, both on red lateritic and on calcareous soils, 800-1100 m, locally common on the sources of rio S. Bartolomeu n. and e. of Lagoa Paranoa in centr. Distrito Federal, Brazil, s. just to Corumba valley near Luizania, Goias, and collected once in upper Parana valley in e.- centr. Goias (s. of S. Joao da Alian9a).—Fl.
I, IV, VI, VIII-X, perhaps intermittently through the year.
405b. Mimosa pseudoradula Glaziou ex Barneby var anapolitana Bameby, var. nov., inter priorem var. detonsam et sequentem var. crystallitem ambigens, cum prima foliolomm numero, cum secunda petiolis abbreviatis 3-4.5 (nec 7-26) cm longis inflorescentiaeque axi retro-setoso congma, ab utraque notis iisdem diversa, ab ambabus patria abstans.—Brazil.
Goias: entre Anapolis e Corumba de Goias, 2.
IV.1958 (fl),^.
Lima 58-3005.-Holotypus, E; isotypus, RB.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In stony soil of campo limpo, known only from Montes Claros and the type-locality between Anapolis and Commba, near 16°15'S, 49°W, in s. Goias.-n. IV(-?).
405c. Mimosa pseudoradula Glaziou ex Bameby var. crystallites Bameby, var. nov., pube brevi foliolisque subappresse setoso-marginatis cum var. detonsa congruens, ab ea imprimis inflorescentiae axi primario retrorsus appresse setoso, ulterius foliis plerumque brevius petiolatis foliolisque 4-6 (nec 6-11)- jugis abstans.—Brazil.
Goias: Sa. dos Cristais ±5 km s. of Cristalina, 1200 m, 4.
III.1966 (fl), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 75577. -Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Characters as given in key to varieties.
In campo mpestre, 1100-1250 m, locally common on the crystalline caprock of Sa. dos Cristais, in s.-e. Goias, Brazil.-Fl. late I-IV. 405d. Mimosa pseudoradula Glaziou ex Barneby var. pseudoradula.
M. pseudoradula Glaziou ex Bameby, ut supra descripta, sens. str. — Brazil.
Distrito Federal: entre Rajadinha et le Rio Jardim, 3l.V. 1895, Glaziou 21075.- Holotypus, P; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 7^27, G, K = NYNeg.
776i^.
M. piUfera Glaziou, Bull. Soc. Bot. France 53(Mem. 3b): 186.
1906, nom. nud. —"Sommet du Morro Canastra [D.F.]."-Specimina authent.,
F! G! K! MO!P! Characters as given in key to varieties.
In cerrado, 950-1050 m, infrequent in the range of var. detonsa within Distrito Federal, Brazil, extending w. to rio Descoberto just outside the district, n.-w. to rio Trairas near 14°30'S and n., certainly to Sa.
Geral do Parana at the same latitude and possibly (Irwin 24264, NY, sterile, lfts strongly venulose) to Chapada dos Veadeiros near lat. 13°40'S.-n. Ill, V-VI, IX. Mimosa pseudoradula is host to two species of Pilostyles (Rafflesiaceae), the var. pseudoradula to P. goyazensis Ule (Irwin 14273), the var. detonsa both to P. goyazensis (Irwin 11544, 11657, 19412) and to P. ulei Solms-Laubach (Anderson 7896), the var. crystallites to P. ulei alone (Irwin 13330, 13830).
I take the identification of Pilostyles from annotations by I. de Vattimo(1977, NY).
406.
Mimosa flavocaesia Bameby, sp. nov., foliolis majusculis firmis, calyce paleaceo, et legumine strigoso M. cyclophyllae similis, sed statura minori, caule ad medium usque (nec basi tantum) foUato, et foliolis oblique vel subdimidiatim ovatis (nec suborbicularibus) margine comeo serratim ciliato (nec laevi) cinctis diversa.—BrazU.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros ±7 km w. of Veadeiros, on bumed-over campo, 950 m, 15.11.1966 (fl), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 12884.— Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, MBM, NY, P, R, S, US. Fig.
23.
M. rigida sensu Glaziou, 1906: 179, ex parte (21074, G! P!); non Bentham.
Functionally herbaceous, macrophyUidious subshrubs from xylopodium, including the simply pseudoracemose inflorescence 3-7 dm tall, the 1-few incurved-ascending or erect stems bearing at each of (2-)3-6 nodes between rootstock and middle a narrowly ascending If, the stems, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence all hispid (or the latter strigose) with widely to narrowly ascending tapering yellow setae to 2-6 mm, the firm glaucescent lfts grossly comeous-marginate and serrately ascending-spinulose-ciliate, all facially glabrous or the 1-2 proximal pairs of some lvs thinly strigose-setose dorsally.
Stipules associated with lvs firm, lanceolate or Unear-oblong 5-13 X 0.8-3 mm, obscurely nerved externally, persistent, those subtending peduncles narrower and often less enduring.
Leafstalks near base of stem 3-8 cm, of some distal lvs only 0.5- 3 cm, all at middle 1.3-1.8 mm diam., bluntly 3-ribbed, broadly shallowly sulcate ventrally; pinnae 1-jug., the axis of each (5-)7-14 cm, the first pair of lfts (1.5-)3-8 mm distant from pulvinus, its anterior lfts much smaller than the posterior one, the longer interfoliolar segments ± 1- 2.5 cm; paraphyllidia minute conic, or obsolete; lfts (5-)6-ll(-13)-jug., subdimidiately or very obliquely ovate obtuse, at base broadly semicordate proximally, the longer ones 19-27 x 10- 16 mm, 1.6-2.2 times as long as wide, all palmately (5-)6-9-nerved from broad short nigrescent pulvinule, the almost straight excentric costa dividing blade ±1:2, the primary and weak secondary venation immersed on upper face, sharply prominulous beneath, the stout yellowish corneous margin with a single file of subappressed tapering setae free for 1.5-2.5 mm.
Peduncles soUtary (2-)2.5-6 cm; capitula globose, without filaments 10-11 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but the minutely pubemlent or glabrous fl-buds only shortly emergent from bracts, these linear-oblanceolate 2.2-3.5 x 0.6- 0.8 mm, glabrous dorsally, near apex ciliate on FIG. 23.
MimosaflavocaesiaBameby.
A. Stem + xylopodium.
B. Node of stem + stipule.
C. Leaflet, dorsal view.
D. Leaflet margin showing confluent setae.
E. Rower. (All from Irwin 12884.) each margin with ±3-5 setae to 1-2 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some or many in a capitulum functionally staminate; calyx paleaceous 2.5-3.8 mm, cleft to below middle into 4 irregularly lacerate lobes; coroUa narrowly funnelform 3.8—4.8 mm, the narrowly cymbiform subcomeous, dorsally keeled lobes 1.2-1.5 X 0.65- 1 mm; filaments pink, connate around pistil into a tubular sheath 2-3.5 mm, exserted 6-8 mm, thickened subapically.
Pods to 3(-?) per capitulum, seen only half-formed but at that stage closely resembling those of M. cyclophylla, the valves densely strigose with forwardly appressed, basally dilated, pale yellowish setae; ovules 4-5.
On stony or sandy campo subject to fire in the dry season, 950-1100 m, known with certainty only from the s. end of Chapada dos Veadeiros within a 20 km radius of Alto Paraiso, near 14°30'S in e.-centr. Goias, Brazil, the single record from Sa. dos Pireneus, ±250 km to s.-w. of Veadeiros (Glaziou 21074, G, P) requiring confirmation.-R. XI-III(-?) Mimosa flavocaesia resembles M. cyclophylla in growth-form, in thick-textured comeously marginate, relatively ample leaflets, and in paleaceous calyx and monadelphous stamens, and is clearly a close relative.
It differs, however, in lesser stature, in stems foliate about to middle and not only radically, and particularly in the obliquely or dimidiately ovate (not suborbicular), rather smaller leaffets ciliate with emergent cilia.
The visually striking contrast between yellowish-setose margin and glaucescent faces of the leaffets suggested the epithet.
407.
Mimosa cyclophylla Taubert, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 21: 429.
1896.-"Habitat in ditione Tocantini superioris in campis ad Paraizo: ULE n. 2825."—Holotypus, +B; isotypus, coUected IX. 1892, HBG!; probable isotypus, Ule 2, R! Fig.
24.
M. parvisensis [sic] Glaziou, 1906: 185, nom. nud.— "Pres du Rio Tocantins."
-(?/^Z/OM 21073, G! P! S! —-Non M. paraizensis Taubert.
Virgate unarmed subshrubs from xylopodium with one or few erect terete wandlike stems, these proximally smooth and 4-7 mm diam., bearing at base or within 2-5 dm of root-crown 2-4(-5) ample lvs, thence passing upward into a leafless pseudoraceme or few-branched panicle of globose capitula, the whole attaining l-2.5(-3.5) m. the stem distally like all axes of inflorescence strigose with forwardly appressed, basally dilated setae to 1-2 mm, the stiffly papery glabrous, grossly caUous-marginate lfts brownish-oUvaceous when young, early glaucescent.
Stipules subtending developed lvs lance-ovate or -acuminate 4.5-9 X (1-)2-3.5 mm, coarsely 4-6 nerved, becoming dry persistent, those at flowering nodes early caducous.
Leaf-stalks of radical and subradical lvs 6-18 cm, of some distal cauline ones only 1-5 cm, all at middle 2-2.8 mm diam., openly shallowly sulcate ventrally, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the axis of each (10-)12- 22 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 18-30 mm; lfts (4-)5-10(-l l)-jug., the first pair 4-12 mm distant from subulate or conic paraphyllidia less than 1 mm, the anterior 1ft of first pair resembling a paraphyllidium, the blades broadly ovate or suborbicular, obtuse or emarginate but often minutely callous-apiculate, the larger ones 3-5 X 2-4 cm, 1-1.7 times as long as wide, aU at base shallowly cordate on both sides or rounded distally, the callous, commonly undulate marginal nerve smooth or distally minutely denticulate, all lfts flabellately (5-)6-l 1-nerved from broad nigrescent pulvinule, the midrib subcentric, the posterior nerves anastomosing with the marginal one, all (together with random, openly reticular venules) immersed or almost so on ventral face of mature lfts, sharply prominulous beneath.
Peduncles solitary 2-10 cm; capitula without filaments 9-11 (-13) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts submembranous, linear-spatulate or -oblanceolate 2.6-4 mm, weakly ciliolate distally with few setae to 0.5-1.2 mm, dorsally glabrous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate and shorter; calyx paleaceous 2-3.5 mm, at base minutely ciUolate extemally, the lobes irregularly cleft to middle or below; corollas 3-5 mm, the shorter ones narrowly funnelform, the longer subcylindric, the tube membranous, the corneous, narrowly cymbiform, glabrous or minutely papiUose lobes 1.1- 1.8 X 0.7-1 mm; filaments connate around the glabrous ovary into a tubular sheath, thickened distally, exserted 6-7 mm.
Pods 1-7 per capitulum, sessile or cuneately attenuate at base, in profile oblong (18-)25-55 x (7.5-)8.5-13 mm, strongly compressed, the shallowly undulate replum 0.3-0.5 mm wide, abmptly contracted apically into a subulate point, the papery valves lowcolliculate and in section ±0.5 mm thick over FIG. 24.
Mimosa cyclophylla Taubert.
A. Flowering stem.
B. Node, showing stipule and shmnken pulvinus of leaf-stalk.
C. Enlarged segment of stem, showing basally dilated setae.
D. Pair of leaflets, ventral view.
E. Flower + bract.
F. Calyx-lobe, enlarged.
G. Pods. (A-F from Irwin 32995; G from Irwin 24274.) each seed, the replum and valves alike strigose with forwardly subappressed tapering yellowish setae to l-2.5(-3) mm, the ripe valves separating from replum and breaking up into (2-)3-4 articles 6-10 mm long; seeds subdiscoid ±5.5-6 x 4.5-5 mm, the brown testa smooth dull.
In campo rupestre and around sandstone outcrops, 1000-1350 m, locally plentiful but endemic to Chapada dos Veadeiros between Terezina and Alto Paraiso, lat. 13°40-14°10'S in e.-centr. Goias, BrazU.-Fl.
I-III; fr.
II-? A mimosa of strikingly individual aspect, M. cyclophylla is distinguished from related wandlike, basally foliate congeners of the central Goias highlands by large suborbicular-ovate leaflets of thick texture, girdled by a strong, almost or quite smooth marginal nerve.
The vicariant M. flavocaesia is a smaller plant, with stems leafy to the middle rather than at base only, and smaller, more oblique leaflets with serrately ciliolate margins.
Mimosa cyclophylla is one host of the rafflesiaceous parasite Pilostyles ulei (Solms-Laubach (Irwin 12642, det.
I. de Vattimo, NY).
408.
Mimosa petiolaris Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 376.
1841.-"Brazil, Po/z/."-Holotypus, Pohl 1377 [probably a mistake for 1379], without data of origin, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1812; presumed isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54855, K (hb. Hook.)! NY (I209)\ W (d.l379 = 1209)1-M. meticulosa \ar. petiolaris (Bentham) Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4(6): 549.
1904, quoad nom., exclus. pi. cit.
M. meticulosa var. petiolaris fma genuina Chodat & Hassler, I.e., nom. superfl. M. petiolaris sensu Bentham, 1875: 402 (locality surmised to be "Goyaz"), 1876: 329, t. 83, fig. 1.
Slender, functionally herbaceous subshrubs from turbinate xylopodium, including the simple or few-branched, remotely few-capitulate efoliate inflorescence 4-11 dm tall, the lvs all subradical or the usually solitary stem bearing a petiolate If at 1-7 nodes below middle, the stem, lf-stks and axes of pseudoraceme strigose-strigulose with forwardly appressed, either short comma-shaped or longer flageUiform setae to 0.4- 2.5 mm, the vesture sometimes proximally sparse and distally denser, some basal lf-stks glabrous, the firm plane brown-olivaceous concolorous lfts glabrous facially, remotely setulose around the corneous margin.
Stipules firm lanceolate 4.5-11 X 1-1.5 mm, commonly glabrous on both faces but sometimes setose dorsally, setulose-ciliate, the early ones persistent but the distal ones more easily detached in age.
Leaf-stalks erect (2.5-)5- 14 cm, at middle (0.4-)0.5-0.8 mm diam., rounded dorsally, shallowly sulcate or merely depressed ventrally, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the erect, straight or gently recurved rachis (3-)4.5- 10 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments (2-)3-6 mm; lfts (10-) 12-21-jug., subvertically imbricate in sleep, decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 1.5-3 mm distant from pulvinus or from corneous, conic or rarely minute and subulate paraphyllidia, the anterior blade of first pair much smaller than its fellow, all blades obliquely lanceolate or dimidiately lance-ovate, obtuse apiculate, those near mid-rachis (6-)8-15 x (2.5-)3-5.5 mm, (2.2-)2.5-3.5 times as long as wide, all dorsally 5-6-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib anterior to the rest and dividing blade ±1:3-4.5, the posterior primary nerves incurved-ascending to margin, secondary venulation immersed, the single file of ciliary setae narrowly ascending, free for 0.3-1 mm.
Peduncles (1.5-)2-6 cm, progressively shorter distally; capitula globose, without filaments 7-9 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but the glabrous lustrous yellowish-olivaceous fl-buds sometimes surpassed by bracteal cilia; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1.6-2.8 X 0.35-0.45 mm, glabrous dorsally, distally pallid-carinate and ciliate with setulae 0.5-1.4 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, many lower ones staminate and shorter than the rest; calyx paleaceous 1.5-2.1 mm, cleft to below middle into deeply decompound, almost pappiform lobes; corolla funnelform 2.4-4 mm, the thickened ovate acute cymbiform lobes 0.8-1 x 0.6 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through 1.5-2 mm, exserted 4.5-6 mm.
Pods (few seen) 1-few per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong, cuneately contracted at each end, ± 15-20 x 6 mm, piano-compressed but low-colliculate over each of 2-3 seeds, the shallowly undulate replum 0.5-0.6 mm wide, the papery valves densely strigose with forwardly appressed tapering yellowish setae to 1.5-2 mm, when ripe separating from replum and breaking up into free-faUing segments ±6 mm long; seeds not seen.
In campo sujo and campo mpestre, ±900- 1250 m, local, known only from basins of rios S. Bartolomeu, Ponte Alta and Descoberto in centr. and s.-w. Distrito Federal and immediately adj. Goias, BrazU.—Fl.
XII-III (-V).
Mimosa petiolaris resembles M. pseudoradula in wandUke habit of growth and in leaves either aU radical or few cauline and scattered below mid-stem, but it is a more delicate plant, instantly separable by leaflets about twice as many and hardly half as large.
It is sometimes (Heringer 8366, 15367, NY) host to Pilostyles.
409.
Mimosa uniceps Bameby, sp. nov., inter Polycephalas, quamm habet calycem paleaceum, statura demissa, caulibus e caudice ut videtur subterranea orientibus 1-1.5 dm tantum longis notabilis.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Sa. do Espinha90 20 km s.-w. of Diamantina, 1300 m, 23.1.1969 (fr), Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 22524.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, K, NY, R, US. Frontispiece (H-K).
Diminutive tufted unarmed subshrubs 1-1.5 dm with loosely cespitose, shallowly subterranean caudex and slender erect stems ±3-6-Ivd at and above middle, the stems, lf-stks and solitary subterminal peduncles all hispid with spreading-ascending, either short and stout or longer flagelliform setae to 0.6-1.6 mm, the firm brown-olivaceous, incipiently glaucescent lfts facially glabrous except for dorsal face of proximal pair, comeous-marginate and setose-ciliate, the subglobose capitula immersed in foliage.
Stipules firm lanceolate 1.5-3.5 x 0.4-0.7 mm, either glabrous or setose dorsally, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks erect slender (1-) 1.3-3 cm, at middle 0.3-0.5 mm diam., obscurely sulcate; pinnae 1-jug., ascending from tip of lf-stk, the gently retro-arcuate rachis 2-4(-5) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-3 mm; lfts of some short lower lvs (4-)7-12-, of longer distal ones to 20- jug., decrescent near base of rachis but scarcely so distally, in sleep subvertically imbricate, the unequal first pair 1-1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia, the blades obliquely oblong, abmptly apiculate, the longer ones 5.5-7.5 x 1.6-2.2 mm, ±3.5 times as long as wide, at base shallowly cordate on proximal side, dorsally 4-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2-2.5, the inner of three posterior nerves attaining ±V4 length of blade and expiring within the margin, the outer primary nerves much shorter, all fully immersed on upper face.
Peduncles subterminal solitary erect ±25 mm; capitula (seen only past anthesis) subglobose, without filaments ±8 mm diam.; bracts oblanceolate 1.7-2 x 0.7 mm, setose dorsally and marginally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, most proximal ones staminate; calyx paleaceous glabrous ±2.3 mm, cleft to below middle into four lacerately setose lobes; corolla 2.8-3 mm, narrowly funnelform, the cymbiform, extemally sublustrous, microscopically puberulent lobes thickened but scarcely corneous; filaments not seen entire.
Pods ±3-10 per capitulum, not forming a dense ball, subsessile, when well fertilized narrowly oblong obtuse ±15 x 4.5 mm and 2-seeded but often broadly elliptic and oneseeded, the densely ascending-setose replum 0.4- 0.6 mm wide, the firmly papery low-convex valves at middle ±0.1 mm thick in section, a little thicker at margin, densely hispid with fine ascending setae to ± 1 mm, when ripe separating in one piece from replum and inertly dehiscent along the sutures, apparently not breaking transversely between seeds, these (1 seen) compressed-obovoid ±4 X 2.7 mm, the brown testa smooth dull.
In campo rupestre at 1300 m, known only from the crest of Sa. do Espinha90 20 km s.-w. of Diamantina, near 18°25'S in centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.—Fr. ripe in I. Mimosa uniceps, a clearly specialized species of campo mpestre, forms dense clumps of foliage rising about 10 cm above soil-level from a branched subterranean caudex.
In its dwarf stature and monocephalous stems it stands apart from all other Polycephalae except the scapose M. pumilio of Chapada dos Veadeiros in Goias.
The small pod with, when two-seeded, valves that fall from the replum in one piece is atypical of Polycephalae.
The species may be related to M. hirsutissima rather than to the core of subser. Polycephalae, but has unarmed stems and conjugate pinnae that only exceptionally coincide in M. hirsutissima and then in diffuse plants with stems several times longer and much longer axillary peduncles.
Fresh flowers are required to determine the form of the androecium.
410.
Mimosa longipes Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 370.
1841.-"BrazU, PohV\ the locality elaborated in Martius, R. bras. 15(2): 324.
1876: ".
. .in campis provinciae Goyaz, ad rio Trahiras inter Serra S. Feliz et Engenho Santa Anna [near 13°10'S, 48°W]."-Holotypus, Pohl d.l462 = 1943, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1803; isotypi, K (hb. Hook.)! W! M. longipes sensu Bentham, 1875: 400; 1876: 323, t. 82.
Subacaulescent, functionally herbaceous subshrub from slender oblique (perhaps creeping) rootstock 3-4 mm diam., the true stem solitary and not over 3 cm long, the few subradical lvs and coeval scapiform peduncles erect and, like the rachis of single pair of pinnae and the heavily corneous lft-margin, hispid with fine erect tapering sordid setae 1-3.5 mm mixed with scattered minute incurved hairs, the firmly chartaceous lfts dull brown concolorous, glabrous on both faces.
Stipules firm erect lance-oblong 7-12 X 1.5-3 mm, striately several-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks laterally compressed 9-15 cm, in profile 0.8-1 mm wide; rachis of pinnae 7-11 cm, the interfoliolar segments 7-14 mm; lfts 7- 18-jug., a little decrescent proximally, the first pair 5-6 mm distant from livid, when dry shmnken pulvinus (no paraphyllidia seen), the obliquely or lunately elliptic, obtuse apiculate blades proximally rounded at base, cuneate distally, those near and beyond mid-rachis 18-35 X 5.5-9.5 mm, all 5-7-nerved from pulvinule, the displaced midrib dividing blade ±1:2.5-3.5, the one anterior nerve slender, narrowly intramarginal, the inner posterior one incurved-ascending almost to blade apex, the rest progressively shorter, anastomosing with corneous margin, all pinnately branched, the secondary venulation fine, faint on upper face but sharply defined beneath.
Peduncles erect 15-35 cm; capitula without filaments ±9-10 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-spatulate 2.5- 3 X 0.4-0.5 mm, glabrous dorsally, weakly setose-ciliolate distally, 1 -nerved; flowers either 4- or 5-merous haplostemonous, glabrous except for minutely papillate margin of corolla-lobes; calyx paleaceous ±2 mm, cleft half-way into setiform-decompound lobes; corolla narrowly funnelform ±4.5 mm, the dorsally carinate incurved lobes ±1.1 X 0.8 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through ±1.2 mm around ovary, exserted ±8 mm.
Pods to six per capitulum, subsessile, in profile narrowly oblong, undulately constricted between (2-)3-4 seeds, when well fertilized 20-30 X 8-9 mm, the replum 0.5 mm wide, the papery brown valves low-colliculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike scabrous-strigulose with forwardly subappressed setae, the individually indehiscent articles 8-11 mm long; seeds not seen.
In campo, probably above 700 m, encountered only by the early travellers through the upper Tocantins valley between 13° and 14°S in centr. Goias: Corrego Trakas n. of S. Felix; Amaro Leite; near Niquelandia.—Fl.
VII-? Bentham referred this notably distinct scapose mimosa to what now appears to be an arbitrarily defined and unnatural ser. Pedunculosae, placing it between M. elongata, which is strongly caulescent and has several pairs of pinnae per leaf and retrostrigulose flowers, and the humifuse M. flagellaris, both of which have minute, not paleaceous calyces.
Mimosa longipes is obviously out of place in this company.
Its stiff", homymarginate leaffets and paleaceous calyx, however, suggest genetic affinity to M. pseudoradula, M. cyclophylla and M. flavocaesia, species of the same general region, none of which were known in Bentham's lifetime.
In this group it stands alone, except for its diminutive sibling M. pumilio, by virtue of subradical leaves and scapiform peduncles nearly as long as or longer than the leaves.
411.
Mimosa pumilio Bameby, sp. nov., ob habitum acaulescentem nulla cum specie nisi M. longipedi arete comparanda, ab ilia, certe affini et vix allopatrica, statura tenella dimidio minori foliolisque minuscuUs 3-5 mm usque longis costa pauUo excentrica carinatis manifeste diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Parque Nacional do Tocantins, 46 km w. de Veadeiros, 24.
IX. 1967 (fl), De Haas Sr., J. H. De Haas & R. P. Belem 297.-Holotypus, BRADE 50330 = NY Neg. 77557; isotypus, NY.
Fig.
25E-I. Diminutive unarmed subacaulescent herb from knotty xylopodium, the stems 0-1.5 cm, the intemodes shorter than stipules, the few, narrowly microphyllidious lvs subradical, the globose capitula on scapiform peduncle as long as or longer than lvs, the lf-axes and peduncles weakly hispid with fine spreading setae to 1-2 mm mixed with minute pubemlence and scattered reddish granular trichomes, the plane thick-textured, vertically imbricate comeous-marginate lfts glabrous facially, almost nerveless above, venulose beneath, setose-ciUate.
Stipules of developed lvs lanceolate 4-10 x 0.7-1.7 mm, glabrous dorsally, setose-ciUate, striate-nerved, some basal ones shorter, obtuse and cataphylloid, aU persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-3.5 cm subterete, at middle 3 mm FIG. 25.
Mimosa hilariana Bameby (A-D) and M. pumilio Bameby (E-I).
A. Stem bearing old fruit and new vegetative growth.
B. Leaflet, dorsal view.
C. Pair of stipules.
D. Pod, showing free-falling but not segmented valves (all from Hatschbach 32164).
E. Plant at anthesis.
F. Leaflet, dorsal view.
G. Bisexualflower.
H. Staminate flower.
I. Roral bract. (All from De Haas 291.) 0.4-0.5 mm diam.; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 2 cm in small early lvs to 5 cm in distal ones, the interfoliolar segments 0.9-2 mm; lfts (9-) 15-50- jug., decrescent only at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.3-2 mm distant from discolored pulvinus (paraphyllidia obsolete), the blades linearor narrowly oblong, straight or slightly incurved from semicordate base, those at mid-rachis 3.5- 5 X 0.7-1.2 mm, 3.4-5 times as long as wide, aU 3-4-nerved from pulvinule, the stout midrib proximally displaced to divide blade ±1:2 but subcentric distaUy, very shortly 1-2 branched near apex, the inner posterior nerve produced well beyond mid-blade, the rest short or obscure.
Peduncles strongly compressed and ribbed, 4.5-11 cm; capitula without filaments 5-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but the bracteal setae emergent; bracts linear-spatulate 1.5-1.9 x 0.4- 0.6 mm, the linear claw glabrous, the blade setose-ciliate;y7c>w^r5 4-6-merous 4-6-androus; calyx membrano-paleaceous 1.6-2 mm, irregularly lobulate and the lobes decompound into capillary setae; corolla violet turbinate 3-3.5 mm, the membranous ovate lobes 1.2-1.5 x 0.9-1 mm, carinate by prominulous midrib, minutely sparsely puberulent dorsally and densely pallidpapillate along margins; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.5-1.2 mm, exserted 6-8 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, 4-ovulate; pod unknown.
In unrecorded microhabitat, but to be expected in campo mpestre above 1000 m, known only from the type-locality, on the sources of rio Tocantins near 14°S in centr. Goias, Brazil.-Fl.
IX-X(-?).
An elegant little mimosa, notable for radical leaves and slender scapose peduncles, in habit not far removed from the related M. petiolaris, but diminished in all parts.
The discovery of 4-merous and 6-merous flowers in one head was unexpected, but the material is too scanty to allow further dissections, and the composition of the capitula remains uncertain.
The species was first collected by Ernst Ule in September 1892 at "Morro do Salto na regiao do Tocantins superior" (762, R!), doubtless close to the typelocality.
412.
Mimosa setifera Pilger, Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 30(2): 156.
1901.-"Matto Grosso: im Unterholtz im Serradao bei Cujaba ([Pilger] n 383. — Bluhend im Marz 1899.)"-Holotypus, +B = F Neg. 1436; fragmentary clastotypus (If, florets), F 609253\ Apparently a wandlike subshrub, in habit resembling M. venatorum or unarmed forms ofM. xanthocentra, the stems, lf-stks and peduncles densely strigose with straight appressed tapering setae to ± 1.5 mm, the lfts glabrous facially, subcontinuously appressed-setose-ciliate, the plumply ovoid capitula pseudoracemose.
Stipules firm erect, narrowly lanceolate 3.5-7 mm.
Leaf-stalks including hard pulvinus 3-7 mm, at middle nearly 1 mm diam.; spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 7-11 cm, the interfoUolar segments to 1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae ±60-73- jug., decrescent only at very ends of rachis, the blades Unear-lanceolate from subrectangular base, acute, those near mid-rachis 8-11 x 1.5-2 mm, at least five times as long as wide, all nerveless above, 1 -nerved beneath, the centric midrib subimmersed to mid-blade, distaUy pallid and prominulous.
Peduncles 2-3 per node, 7-12 mm; capitula without filaments ±5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds thinly strigulose at tip; bracts Unear-attenuate 1.5-1.7 x 0.25 mm, dorsally glabrous 1-nerved, setulose-ciliolate above middle; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx minutely pedicellate, paleaceous, 1.5-1.7 mm, the four scarious lobes united into a cup ±0.3 mm deep, each decompound nearly to middle into capillary setae; corolla narrowly funnelform 2.3-2.8 mm, the navicular, dorsally keeled lobes ±0.7 X 0.5 mm, thinly pilosulous externally on either side of glabrous keel; filaments (presumably pink when fresh) monadelphous through ± 1 mm, exserted 4 mm; pod unknown.
In underbrush of cerradao near 200 m, known only from the type-locality at Cuiaba, Mato Grosso, BrazU.-Fl.
III-IV(-?).
The description of M. setifera has been compiled from the protologue, the cited type-photograph, and direct observations of fragments at the Field Museum consisting of a leaf and flowers.
The specimens collected by Pilger were truncated stems perhaps 5 dm long, and suggest a plant similar in habit and stature to M. venatorum or M. xanthocentra var. subsericea.
The leaflets resemble those of var. subsericea in shape and venation, but the paleaceous calyx and monadelphous filaments are in closer agreement with ser. Polycephalae.
More complete material and the fmits are required to round out the description.
From present evidence, however, M. setifera appears materially different from any mimosa yet characterized.
E(ii.22).
Series MIMOSA subseries DICERASTEAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Dicerasteae Bameby, subser. nov., omnibus fere cum subser. Polycephalis congmae, sed inter iUas statura arborescenti necnon caule sub quoque nodo aculeis geminis infrastipularibus armato anomalae, ideo subseriem propriam sistens.—Sp. unica: M. dicerastes Bameby.
Arborescent, 2-4 m, and stems armed at nodes with pairs of infrastipular aculei; otherwise exactly as microphyllidious members of subser. Polycephalae.
Sp.
1, of upland e.-centr. Goias, Brazil.
Mimosa dicerastes presents this unexpected combination of characters: a) arborescent stature; b) a pair of nearly terete infrastipular aculei at each node of young branchlets; and c) the fforal stmcture of subser. Polycephalae, i.e., paleaceous calyx, callous-thickened corolla-lobes, and strongly monadelphous filaments.
Irwin's fieldnotes describe M. dicerastes as forming arborescent shrubs 2-4 meters tall, with tmnks attaining 4 cm in diameter; and the young infforescences that terminate the virgate, densely foliate branches are only shortly if at all exserted from densely crowded leaves.
By contrast M. radula and its kindred, whether macrophyllidious or, like M. dicerastes, microphyllidious, are virgate subshmbs with extended efoliate infforescences, and are never, even randomly, aculeate.
The one caulescent species of subser. Polycephalae known to occur in the range of M. dicerastes is M. venatoria, a subshmb attaining a maximum recorded height of about one meter.
Outside of subser. Polycephalae I can find no close or even remote relationship for this species and feel obliged to describe for it a monotypic subseries.
413.
Mimosa dicerastes Bameby, sp. nov., foliorum calycisque paleacei forma cum M. papposa et affinibus bene congruens, sed ab illis omnibus caule ad omnes nodos aculeis duobus infrastipularibus vulnerantibus armato necnon statura arborescenti elata diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros 25 km n. of Alto Paraiso, 23.
III.1971 (ff ineunte), Irwin (with Harley & G. L. Smith) 33015a.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, NY, R, US. Arborescent shrubs with knotty defoUate trunks and branches, the densely foliate homotinous stems armed at all nodes with a pair of spreading, erratically upor down-curved, subterete stramineous aculei to ±(1.5-)2-5 mm long and near base 0.4-1 mm diam., the homotinous stems, lfstks and peduncles densely strigose-pilose with slender tapering brownish setae to ±1.5-2 mm, the firm crowded, subconcolorously gray-oUvaceous lfts finely densely puberulent on both faces and some proximal ones in addition dorsally appressed-setulose, the peduncles solitary in axils of coeval or immediately hysteranthous lvs, at early anthesis forming a condensed pseudoraceme hardly longer than wide, but this perhaps longer in fruit.
Stipules erect firm Unear-attenuate 5-7 X 0.3-0.5 mm, caducous before fuU expansion of associated If.
Leaf-stalks including hard pulvinus 4-11 mm, indistinctly sulcate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of each (3-)3.5-7.5 cm, rounded dorsally, carinate ventrally and shallowly excavate laterally between successive pairs of pulvinules, these to 1-2 mm apart; lfts 34-45- jug., decrescent toward each end of rachis but more gradually so distally, the small unequal first pair less than 1 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), all in outline narrowly lance-oblong from shallowly semicordate base, acute or abruptly apiculate at apex, straight or obscurely arched forward, those near mid-rachis (4-)5-8.5 X 1-2 mm, 4-5 times as long as wide, veinless on upper face, beneath faintly 3-(4)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:3, the inner posterior nerve produced almost to blade apex, the outer 1 (-2) shorter.
Peduncles 15-25 mm; capitula subglobose, without filaments 6.5-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the 4-angulate ff-buds minutely papillatepuberulent at apex; bracts linear-spatulate 1.8- 2.3 X 0.3-0.4 mm, glabrous and keeled dorsally, the dilated tip setulose-ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, only a few distal ones bisexual, the lower staminate and smaller; calyx paleaceous 1.5-2.3 mm, cleft to within ±0.5 mm of base into four setose-decompound lobes; corollas accrescent upward through capitulum, 2.6-3.4 mm, the tube narrowly funnelform, the reddish, callous-thickened cymbiform lobes 0.75-0.9 x 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through ±1 mm, exserted 5-6 mm; pod unknown.
In campo mpestre, 1000-1250 m, known only from Chapada dos Veadeiros at points 22-25 km n. and 30 km w. of Alto Paraiso, near 14°S in e.- centr. Goias, Brazil.-n. III-V(-?).
E(ii.23).
Series MIMOSA subseries DISCOBOLAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Discobolae Bameby, subser. nov., a subser. Polycephalis, cum qua flosculis 4-meris 4-andris, calyce paleaceo, coroUaeque lobulis subcoriaceis bene congruunt, glabritie omnium fere partium, foliorum formula u-iv/10-15, foliomm margine calvo vel setulis vestigialibus tantum ciliolato necnon filamentis a basi liberis abstantes, a ser. Myriophyllis, quoad foliorum formulam haud dissimilibus, craspedio glaaberrimo desmodioidi inter articulos monospermos discoideos profunde strangulato diversae.—Sp. unica: M. discobola Barneby.
Amply foliate, virgate subshrubs of cerrado, flowering in the dry season; indumentum almost or quite suppressed, the lf-stks, inflorescence-axes and Ift-margins sometimes vestigially appressedsetulose, neither pubemlent nor glandular; stipules caducous; leaf-formula (i-)ii-iv/10-l 5, both pinnae and lfts openly spaced along their axis of origin; larger lfts 8-12 mm, weakly 5-6-nerved; inflorescence an efoliate pseudoraceme or a panicle of pseudoracemes of small globose capitula; calyx paleaceous, the lobes deeply decompound; corolla glabrous, the lobes corneous cymbiform; filaments free; pod a glabrous planocompressed craspedium deeply constricted between 2-4 discoid articles.
Sp.
1, localized on the Brazilian Planalto in n.- e. Mato Grosso do Sul and adj. Goias.
Mimosa discobola presents a syndrome of characters that precludes its assignment to any group hitherto described in the genus.
The morphology of its capitula and individual flowers, except for free filaments, is compatible with ser. Polycephalae, and its virgate growth-habit and efoliate panicle are quite reminiscent of the sympatric M. (Polycephalae) polycephala var. taxifolia, with which it may have some real genetic link.
The leaf of the large subser. Polycephalae is, however, stabilized at exactly one pair of pinnae.
An extended leaf-stalk bearing two to four pairs of pinnae spaced along it at wide intervals is found elsewhere in sect. Mimosa in a) ser. Myriophyllae, which are heavily setose, microphyllidious, and (with one exception) have valvately dehiscent fmits; in b) some few members of subser. Reptantes, which have retrostrigulose corollas and axillary peduncles; and in c) the seriaUy prickly and sarmentose subser. Teledactylae.
The glabrous, when dry dark reddish leaves ofM. discobola are more suggestive of some species of diplostemonous sect. Batocaulon, for example M. echinocaula, than of any member of sect. Mimosa, but close examination of leaflets on Hatschbach 31936 (NY) reveals vestigial cilia of the basally immersed type that characterizes true Mimosa but are not found in sect. Batocaulon.
A similar suppression of setose indumentum is known in the habitally similar M. atlantica.
The craspedium ofM. discobola is notable chiefly for a replum deeply constricted at both sutures, and consequently for almost round discoid articles, as well as for complete lack ofbristles from both valves and replum.
414.
Mimosa discobola Bameby, sp. nov., signis plurimis supra sub titulo Discobolarum elaboratis notabilis.—Brazil.
Goias: upper Araguaia basin, in cerrado, 700 m, ±87 km s.-e. of Aragar^as, 21.
VI. 1966 (fr), Irwin (with Souza, Grear & Reis dos Santos) 17561. —Holotypus, UB; isotypi, K, NY, R, alibi.
Mato Grosso do Sul: Campo Grande-Cuiaba highway in mun. Rio Verde, 15.
V.1973 (fl), G. Hatschbach 31936.-Varatypi, HBG, MBM, NY.
Fig.
26.
Virgately erect, amply leafy unarmed subshrubs 10-18 dm, glabrous except for rare, vestigially or remotely appressed-setulose lf-axes, pulvinules, or bracts of inflorescence, the stout smooth substriate, minutely black-dotted stems at base fistular and to 5-6 mm diam., foliate to middle or beyond, thence passing into a simple pseudoraceme or a narrow thyrsiform or pyramidal panicle of proportionately small capitula, the stems and concolorous lvs when dry purplishbrown subglaucescent, the thick-textured but thin-margined lfts dull on both faces, veinless above.
Stipules caducous, none seen.
Leaf-stalks (3-)4.5-l 1 cm, the petiole including grossly dilated nigrescent pulvinus (1.5-)2.5—6 cm, at middle 0.7-1.1 mm diam., the interpinnal segments (8-) 10-20 mm, the open ventral groove continuous, spicules 0; pinnae (1-)2-4-jug., subequUong or the proximal pair shorter, the axis including Uvid wrinkled pulvinus (3.5-)4-8 cm, the longer interfoUolar segments 4-6 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 10-15-jug., the smaU first pair 2.5- 5 mm distant from minute triangular-subulate caducous paraphyllidia, the rest subequilong, the blades obliquely oblong-eUiptic from obtusely semicordate or simply obtusangulate base, obtuse at apex, the larger ones 8-12 x (2.2-)2.5- FIG. 26.
Mimosa discobola Bameby.
A. Inflorescence.
B. Leaf C. Leaflet, ventral (left) and dorsal (right) views.
D. Flower.
E. Pod + seed. (A-D from Irwin 17561; E from Hunt 6116.) 5.5 mm, 2.1-2.4 times as long as wide, on dorsal face weakly 5-6-nerved from pulvinule, the straight midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2- 2.6, the single anterior and 3-4 posterior nerves expiring within the margin, unbranched.
Peduncles solitary, mostly 1-3 cm, some distal ones shorter; capitula globose, without filaments 5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1.2-1.6 x 0.3-0.4 mm, shortly ciUolate distally, shorter than the glabrous, obtusely 4-angulate fl-buds; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx paleaceous 1-1.5 mm, cleft to or below middle into four deeply decompound lobes; corolla 2-2.5 mm, tubular-funnelform, the narrowly oblong cymbiform subacute corneous lobes 0.8-1 X 0.4-0.5 mm; filaments pink-lavender, free to base, exserted ±3 mm; ovary glabrous.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, subsessile at cuneate base, lomentiform piano-compressed 1.5^.5 cm, consisting of 1-3(-4) disciform round or broadly eUiptic glabrous articles 9-13 mm in greatest diam. separated by isthmi 2-6 mm wide subequally indented from each suture, the narrowly ribbonlike replum 0.6-0.9 mm wide, the articles separating from it when ripe and falling as individually indehiscent 1 -seeded achenes, the lustrous brownish-stramineous or livid-castaneous, delicately venulose valves at middle of each article low-colliculate over the seed and ±0.1 mm thick in section, thickened toward the margins; seeds discoid ±7.5 x 6 mm, the testa dull brown, but fuscous within the pleurogram.
In cerrado, apparently local about the watershed of rios Araguaia, Paraguai and Paranaiba in lat. 16°-19°S,long. 52°-55°W, known only from Sa. das Tabocas (at 700 m) in far s.-w. Goias, Brazil and from mun. Rio Verde in adjoining Mato Grosso do Sul.-Fl.
IV-VI. E(ii.24).
Series MIMOSA subseries HIRSUTAE (Bentham) Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Hirsutae (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Hirsutae Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 398.
1875. —Sp. lectotypica: M dispersa Bentham = M. hirsuta sensu Bentham, non Sprengel = M. hirsutissima Martius.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Hirsutaesensu Bentham, 1876: 320.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Pudicae sensu Bentham, 1875: 397, ex parte, quoad spp. 43-45, calyce pappiformi a Pudicis veris dissociandas; 1876: 318, quoad spp. 32-35.
FunctionaUy herbaceous subshrubs from woody root or xylopodium, the simple or distally branched stems either erect, diffuse-assurgent, or humifuse, (0.5-)l-20(-30) dm, either (the majority) unarmed or, either potentially (Mm. hirsutissima, ruftpila) or characteristically (M digitata), armed with 1-2 immediately infrastipular (and rare, random infrapetiolar or intemodal) aculei, the inflorescence most often exclusively axillary, but sometimes pseudoracemose in early anthesis or (M vestita) permanently; indumentum of minute puberulence and relatively slender, often sordid or tawny, smooth or microscaberulous setae, nowhere glandular, the lfts setose-ciliate but not continuously marginate; stipules Unear or lanceolate, 1-8-nerved; leafformula i-iv/(4-)5-24(-32), the lf-stks (2-)5-65 mm, espiculate, the rachis (none in conjugatepinnate forms o f M hirsutissima) either extended or contracted, the pinnae then palmately divergent from tip of lf-stk; longer lfts mostly 4.5- 16 (in M digitata mostly 3-5, in M caaguazuensis attaining 32) mm, all 3-7(-9)-nerved; peduncles either solitary or geminate (0.7-)l-12(- 16) cm; capitula globose or plumply ellipsoid; calyx paleaceous or paleaceous-pappiform, either symmetrical or spathiform, the abaxial (and sometimes the lateral) lobes then suppressed; corolla (2-)2.3-4.3 mm, the lobes either membranous or caUous; filaments monadelphous through 0.6-1.8 mm; pods (7-)12-26(-33) mm, (1-)2- 5(-6)-seeded, the replum 0.3-0.8 mm wide, the dehiscence craspedial.
Spp. 10, of campestral and savanna habitats, most numerous and diverse on the Brazilian Planalto and on campos of s.-e. Paraguay and adj. Argentina, one (M hirsutissima) thence widely discontinuously dispersed n.-ward to n.- e. Brazil, Venezuela, and s.-e. Mexico.
The subseries Hirsutae consists of species wholly compatible with my concept of subser. Polycephalae except for pinnae of all or most leaves actually, in M hirsutissima potentially, 2- 4-, not exactly 1-jugate, and for the occurrence in few members of random nodal aculei.
The subseries differs consistently from subser. Pudicae only in paleaceous calyx coincident with strongly monadelphous filaments.
Because of its exserted efoliate, wandlike pseudoraceme M. vestita is ambiguously poised between subser. Hirsutae and Polycephalae, differing from the latter simply in pinna-number; while M hirsutissima, because of sometimes conjugate pinnae and sometimes aculeate nodes, can be excluded from subser. Pudicae only by basally monadelphous androecium.
The nucleus of subser. Hirsutae, most of whose members were known, albeit imperfectly, prior to 1875, was assembled in nearly the present form in Bentham's monograph.
I have transferred to it from Bentham's immediately preceding ser. Pudicae the three species M digitata, M. ruftpila and M. nervosa (the M hirsutissima of these pages, of which the unarmed form already in 1875 appeared in ser. Hirsutae under the title ofM. hirsuta Sprengel), which Bentham perceived as a subgroup differing from the core of Pudicae by relatively elongate peduncles.
WhUe I attribute little systematic import to length of eign to subser. Pudicae sens. str. allies this trio peduncles, the basally connate androecium forclosely to subser. Hirsutae.
Conspectus of subser. Hirsutae Mimosa * Pinnae 1-3-jug., when more than 1-jug. in some or aU lvs then spaced along an extended rachis, not palmately crowded at tip of lf-stk; peduncles axillary to coeval lvs; stipules 3-5-nerved.
415. hirsutissima Martius a. var. hirsutissima b. var. barbigera (Bentham) Bameby c. var. grossa Bameby 416. pogonoclada Bentham ** Pinnae more than 1-jug. and spaced along an extended rachis; inflorescence pseudoracemose efoliate; stipules 1-nerved.
417. vestita Bentham *** Pinnae 2-4-jug., subpalmate at tip of lf-stk; stems armed; stipules 1-nerved.
418. digitata Bentham **** Pinnae of***; stems potentially aculeate only in M. ruftpila, otherwise unarmed; stipules 3-8-nerved except in M. monadelpha.
419. ruftpila Bentham 420. macrocephala Bentham 421. procurrens Bentham 422. monadelpha Chodat & Hassler a. var. monadelpha b. var. glabrata (Hassler) Bameby 423. lupinoides Chodat & Hassler 424. caaguazuensis Bameby Key to species of subser. Hirsutae 1.
Petiole proper either shorter than or as long as, but no longer than rachis, at least some lvs, usually all, composed of more than 1 pair of pinnae.
2.
Stems armed at nodes; forms of widespread: 415.
M. hirsutissima (p. 692).
2.
Stems unarmed.
3.
Plant erect or assurgent, the densely foliate stem passing upward into a simple or branched, efoliate pseudoraceme; stipules 1-nerved; centr. Goias 417.
M. vestita (p. 697).
3.
Plant diffiise or humifuse, the stem more distantly foliate and the long-pedunculate capitula all axillary to coeval lvs; stipules 3-5-nerved.
4.
Pinnae of more vigorous lvs 2-3-jug., the rachis of longest pair (20-)25-80 mm; interruptedly widespread from s. Mexico to Argentina 415.
M. hirsutissima (p. 692).
4.
Pinnae of aU lvs 4-jug., the rachis of longest pair 14-20 mm; local in w. Minas Gerais, Brazil.
416.
M pogonoclada (p. 696).
1.
Petiole of larger lvs 2-20 times as long as the rachis, or pinnae sometimes only 1 pair.
5.
Pinnae 1-jug.; forms of: 415.
M. hirsutissima (p. 692).
5.
Pinnae 2-4-jug. 6.
Stems armed at some nodes with 1-3 aculei.
7.
Pinna-pairs well separated along rachis; widespread; forms of: ... 415.
M. hirsutissima (p. 692).
7.
Pinna-pairs subcontiguous at tip of lf-stk; planaltine Brazil.
8.
Stipules 1-nerved; largest lfts 3-6 x 0.7-1.3 mm, 2-3-nerved; calyx symmetrically pappiform 418.
M. digitata (p. 698).
8.
Stipules 3-5-nerved; largest lfts 5.5-8.5 x 1.4-2.5 mm, 4-6-nerved; calyx asymmetrical, spathiform; armed state of: 419.
M. ruftpila (p. 699).
6.
Stems unarmed.
9.
Pinna-pairs weU separated along rachis, the If conventionaUy pinnate; uncommon unarmed state of: 415.
M. hirsutissima (p. 692).
9.
Pinna-pairs inserted contiguously or almost so at tip of lf-stk, the If palmatipinnate.
10.
Plants of Paraguay and adj. Argentina, perhaps in immediately adj. Brazil.
11.
Stems erect 5-10 dm; stipules 1-nerved; lfts of longer pinnae 24-30-jug.; peduncles 1-3 cm; corolla-lobes subcomeous 422.
M. monadelpha (p. 702).
11.
Stems 2-A dm; stipules 3-7-nerved; lfts of longer pinnae 4-15-jug.; peduncles 6-16 cm; coroUa-lobes membranous.
12.
Plant erect; lfts of longer pinnae 8-15-jug.; setae of stem and lfts 1.5-3 mm and lfts pubescent on both faces; calyx symmetrically paleaceous 423.
M. lupinoides (p. 703).
12.
Plant pliantly decumbent; lfts of longer pinnae 4-9-jug.; setae of stem and lftmargin 2-5.5 mm and lfts glabrous on upper face; calyx spathiform 424.
M. caaguazuensis (p. 704).
10.
Plants of planaltine Brazil (centr. and s.-e. Goias, Distrito Federal, and far transfranciscan Minas Gerais).
13.
Larger lfts 5.5-9.5 x 1.4-2.5 mm; peduncles 2-5.5 mm 419.
M. ruftpila (p. 699).
13.
Larger lfts (9-) 10-16 x 3-7 mm; peduncles 4-11 cm.
14.
Stems erect; lfts pilosulous above; calyx spathiform; filaments exserted 3^.5 mm 420.
M. macrocephala (p. 700).
14.
Stems pliantly humifuse; lfts glabrous above; calyx subobsolete, the adaxial lobe alone developed and this reduced to a few short setae; filaments exserted 6-7 mm 421.
M. procurrens (p. 701).
415.
Mimosa hirsutissima Martius, Flora 21(2, Beibl.
4-5): 55 (=Herb. fl. bras. 135).
1838.- Typus infra sub var. hirsutissima indicatur.
Diffuse, trailing or sometimes pliantly humifuse, often functionally herbaceous subshrubs commonly 5-20 dm, sometimes only 2-^ dm, exceptionally attaining 30 dm, either unarmed or armed at some (but often at only few and random) nodes with a hornlike or less often laterally compressed, infrapetiolar aculeus 1-4 mm rarely accompanied by a pair of infrastipular ones, the simple or widely few-branched stems together with lf-stks and peduncles hirsute with coarse or subcapillary, erect, erect-incurved, or exceptionally forwardly subappressed, pallid or rufescent setae to 1.5-7(-9) mm, the olivaceous, sometimes bmnnescent foliage subconcolorous, the plane lfts smooth or almost so above, venulose beneath, finely strigulose or subappressedpilose on both faces to glabrous above or on both faces, but always ciliate with forwardly subappressed setae not retroconfluent into a continuous margin, the globose or plumply ellipsoid, solitary or rarely geminate capitula in an often long succession of If-axils on a peduncle much longer than subtending lf-stk but sometimes no longer than the whole If Stipules firm, lanceolate or Unear-attenuate 4-11 x 0.5-2 mm, dorsally (1-)3-5-nerved and either glabrous, pubemlent, or setose, always setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leafstalks (3-)5-55(-65) mm, the petioles 3-65 mm, nearly always progressively shorter upward along stem, at middle subcompressed laterally and (0.4-)0.5-l mm diam., the interpinnal segment(s), if present, (1-)3-l 1(-15) mm, the ventral groove then bridged between lower pair(s) but spicules 0; pinnae commonly 1-jug. in lower lvs and 2-3-jug. in upper ones, but in some populations (or individual plants) all or almost all 1-jug., in others both 1- and 2-jug., 3 pairs relatively infrequent; rachis of longer pinnae (2-)2.5-7(-8) cm, the interfoliolar segments (1-)2-5.5(-6.5) mm; lfts of longer pinnae mostly (8-)10-17(-19), exceptionally 5-11-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, otherwise subequUong, the first pair l-2(-2.5) mm distant from subulate green or reddish, sometimes setiform and obscure paraphyllidia 0.3-0.9(-l .2) mm, the blades obliquely lance-oblong, oblong-elUptic or obliquely ovate from semicordate base, abruptly apiculate-mucronulate, those at and near midrachis (5-)6-21 X (1.6-)2-7 mm, 2.4-5 times as long as wide, all (4-)5-6-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2-5, either simple or 1-4-branched beyond mid-blade, one primary nerve on each side produced almost to blade apex (the anterior one sometimes weak submarginal), the 2-3 outer posterior nerves successively shorter, the venation all immersed or almost so above, beneath prominulous and often pallid.
Peduncles ascending toward meridian (3-)4-10(-12) cm; capitula without filaments 6- 8(-9) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but hispid with emergent bracteal setae; bracts linear or Unear-spatulate 1.5-2.6(-3.1) x 0.2-0.45 mm. glabrous 1 -nerved dorsally, toward apex setosea pubescent variety endemic to the Tocantinsciliate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower Sao Francisco watershed in westem Bahia and ones staminate and shorter; calyx pallid paleaadjoining Goias, in which the leaf-formula is ceous, commonly 1.5-2.5(-2.7) mm, less often somewhat modified.
The more pubescent var. 1-1.7 mm, the lobes deeply fimbriate-decomhirsutissima is very widely but discontinuously pound or setose-dentate; corolla narrowly vasedispersed from the Orinoco valley south to Parshaped or subcylindric (1.7-)2.2-3.5(-3.7) mm, aguay and, in Brazil, to S. Paulo, whereas the the ovate-cymbiform callous, dorsally carinate presumably derived, glabrate var. barbigera is lobes 0.7-1.3 x 0.5-0.8 mm, extemally greenish confined to middle and high elevations of the and usually glabrous but sometimes minutely Brazilian Planalto. hispidulous or papillate, intemally often anthoAs redefined herein, M. hirsutissima differs cyanic; filaments pink, weakly monadelphous when armed from M. pudica in the paleaceous through 0.6-1 mm, exserted 4.5-8 mm; ovary calyx.
When unarmed and with more than one glabrous, commonly 4-ovulate.
Pods ±2-12 per pair of pinnae per leaf it resembles M. procurrens, capitulum, sessile or almost so, in profile narbut this, like M. pudica, has a minute calyx.
When rowly oblong 9-26 x 4-6.5 mm, 2^-seeded, unarmed but with all pinnae conjugate, its paabruptly cuspidate apically, the shallowly conleaceous calyx combined with axillary peduncles stricted replum 0.3-0.6(-0.7) mm wide, charged is characteristic; whereas when armed and with on back and sides with setae to (0.7-) 1.3-3.5 all pinnae conjugate it is infallibly distinguished mm, the stiffly papery, green or reddish, finaUy by relatively wide, mostly 5-6-nerved leaflets. brunnescent valves either glabrous, or pubem- ,^ .^, ^ ,. "
, , , , .
.
Key to varieties of M. hirsutissima lent overall, or both pubemlent and setulosescabemlous (the indumentum sometimes varii.
Lfts of longer pinnae 11-15-jug. and the larger able between articles of one pod), when ripe ones either less than 3.5 mm wide or glabrous breaking up into free-falling biconvex, tardily defacially. hiscent articles 3-5 mm long; seeds (few seen 2.
Lfts puberulent (silky) or both puberulent and *" ^ \ o finely setose-stngose on both faces or only ripe) plumply lentiform 3-3.5 x 2.4-2.8 mm, beneath; widespread from Venezuela to s.-e. the smooth testa dull brown.
Brazil and n.-e. Argentina This easily recognized but somewhat poly- 415a. var. hirsutissima (p. 693). morphic species was separated by Bentham into 2.
Lfts glabrous on both faces or, occasionaUy, , , , r. J J .^ ^1 a few lfts near base of pinna thmly stngose an aculeate M. nervosa referred, despite the ex- ^^^^^^y.
BraziUan PlanaUo and perhaps e. istence of unarmed varieties, to the armed ser. Paraguay 415b. var. barbigera (p. 694).
Pudicae, and a little group of unarmed but oth- 1.
Lfts of longer pinnae 5-10-jug. and the larger erwise similar species (Mm. hirsutissima, hirsuta ones 5-9 mm wide; local along and near the comand barbigera) which formed the nucleus of un- ^ ° ^ ^°^^^^^ ^^ ^""^^^ 5^ ^l^^^^ossX 696) armed ser. Hirsutae.
The random and erratic development of aculei at different nodes of one . ^ - , , . ,
.
.
. ^, . ..rr .
. r 1 ^ ^ r 415a. Mimosa hirsutissima Martius var. hirsustem, on different stems of one plant, and from ^.
. ,
^ , . ^, .c-^c^ ^.
. ,
. ^,.,
, , tissima.
M. hirsutissima Martius, 1838, I.e., one to another population of like plants growing ^ ,,^ . ,
^ , ' , .
. ,
1 - 1 J*- 1 sens, str.— Crescit in campis ad Taubate, Prov. under similar ecological conditions, make seg- ^ ^ T^ ^• ^ .
T^ i. • no.-,! "
TT i - ,, ,.
. ' , .
S. Pauli.
Floret Decembn [1817]."—Holotyregation along these lines impossible to main- ,^ .• ^^^ ^^, ^^r J^^^ .- 1.
M i - r ^ u A pus, Martius 467, M\ = FNeg.
6183. tain.
Members of the unarmed group were sup- *^ posed by Bentham to differ in pubescence, length M. tomentosa Humboldt & Bonpland ex Willdenow, of leafstalk, and number of pinnae, but these Sp. pi. 4:1033.1806, nom. illeg.-"//^MflnTiAmerfeatures are now known to vary independently, ^^^ Tf^'''^''^''^'T ^^^P^y^"' 1^^ i^^^^H!^ ^1^^" ^ , ^^ .. r-r i . • 1- orated by Kunth, Mimoses 11, t. 4.
1819: "in npa and the definition of infraspecific categones has ^^^^^^^ Orinoco, prope Maypures, Atures et Caribecome ever more elusive as comparative machana."
-Holotypus, Humboldt s.n.,
B-WILLD terial has accumulated.
With some misgiving I 19071, seen in microform!; isotypus, Humboldt & here propose to recognize two main series of Bonpland 1164, P-HBK!; presumed isotypus, Bonforms, one more or less glabrous, but each vari- £^^^P^:unde-B^,°^n Ner^^^^^ ^ o t able in length of cauhne setae, m development igos. of aculei, and in size of leaflets; and beyond these M. dispersa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 369.
1841. — "Brazil, Sello; Tejuco [=Diamantina, Minas Gerais], [Riedel, misit] L<3/2^5^or^"—Lectotypus, Riedel 1305 = no. 23 ex herb, petrop.,
K!—Equated by Bentham, 1875: 399 & 1876; 321, with M. hirsuta Spreng.; cf under that name, below.
M. nervosa var. longipila Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 319.
1876.-".
.
. in campis ad Lagoa Santa: Warming."
—Holotypus, K!; isotypi, C (Mimosa n. 77)! = FNeg.
27555, US! M. nervosa var. villosissima Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 319.
1876.—".
.
. verisimiliter in prov. Minas Geraes: Lund."
—Holotypus, C! = F Neg. 21884.
M. studartiana Huber, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 1: 303.
1901.—"Hab.
Endroits sablonneux entre Fortaleza et Bemfica (85). (Ceara BrazU, Huber)."—Holotypus, collected 9/10.
IX.1897, MG! M. nervosa var. missionum Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 138, fig. 21N, lam. 16.
1948.-"Argentina, Misiones: Santa Ana, sabanas, A. Burkart 14743, 16- XII. 1943."—Holotypus, SI, seen only in lamina 6, supra cit.; isotypus, GH!; paratypus, Burkart 15331, K! (?) M. nervosa var. alboftiana Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 140,fig.21A. 1948.—"Argentina.
Misiones: San Ignacio, en los campos, leg. Nicolas Alboff, 22-XI. 1896."-Holotypus, LP 13148, not seen.
M. tomentosa sensu Humboldt, Bonpland & Kunth, 1824: 253; Bentham, 1841: 369; 1875: 399.
M. hirsuta sensu Bentham, 1875: 399; 1876: 321; vix M. hirsuta K. Sprengel, Syst. veg. 2: 204.
1825, quae pinnis conjugatim 1-jugis et patria uruguayana discrepat.—Vide Nomina Dubia in Append.
I (p. 775).
M. hirsutissima sensu Bentham, 1875: 399; 1876: 322; Lewis, 1987, fig. 90.
M. nervosa sensu Bentham, 1842: 370, ex parte, quoad paratypum solum; 1875: 398; 1876: 319.
Stems procumbent, assurgent, or prostrate but not radicant, becoming 5-30 dm, either armed or not; cauline setae mostly 2-7 mm; petioles 4- 40 mm; pinnae 1-, 1-2- or 2-3-jug., the rachis of longer ones (2-)2.5-6.5 cm; lfts of longer pinnae 1 l-17(-19)-jug., either strigose-pUosulous on both faces or only beneath, the larger ones 6-17 X (1.6-)2-A(-5)mm;peduncles(2>-)A-9(-l l)cm.
In dry stony or sandy campo and also in wet campo or brejo, locally common on the Brazilian Planalto between 500 and 1350 m, from both slopes of Sa. do Espinha90 in centr. and n.-centr. Minas Gerais w. to centr. Goias, thence scattered, commonly at lower elevations, to the Parana basin in s.-centr. S. Paulo, Mato Grosso do Sul, s.-e. Paraguay, and n.-e. Argentina; e. and n., sometimes in restinga, to Ceara and Pemambuco; and distantly allopatric in llano and morichal at 100-170 m on the Colombian llanos of Arauco, Meta and Vichada, and in the Orinoco valley in Guarico, Bolivar and Amazonas, Venezuela.—The type-locality in far eastem S. Paulo requires confirmation.—Fl. in s. South America mostly XI-IV, in Venezuela VII-XII(-?).
Map 64.
Populations of var. hirsutissima with nothing but conjugate pinnae in every leaf are of rare and sporadic occurrence at the periphery of the species' South American range: in Pemambuco (Pickel 3923, NY, US), in Bahia (Hatschbach 49508, NY), and in Paraguay (Balansa 1482, G; Jorgensen 4556, NY).
One collection from Paraguay (Igatimi, Hassler 4767, G, reported by Chodat & Hassler, 1906: 488, as M. barbigera) is partly of this sort, partly different in broader glabrous leaflets suggesting those of (or introgression from) M. flagellaris.
Most populations of M. hirsutissima with normally 2-3 -jugate pinnae in at least some upper leaves have leaflets not more than 11 mm long or 3 mm wide.
In northcentral Minas Gerais (Irwin 23004, 23681, NY) the largest leaflets attain 17 x 4—5 mm, dimensions approached, however by the type of M. hirsutissima itself.
415b. Mimosa hirsutissima Martius var. barbigera (Bentham) Bameby, Brittonia 37: 152.
1985, based on autonym generated by M. barbigera var. erecta Bentham, I.e. infra. M. barbigera Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 371.
1841.-"Prov.
Goyaz, Gardner, n. 3132."
- Holotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! = IPA Neg. 1265 = NY Neg. 1800; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1302\ BM! F! = F Neg. 54808, G! L! NY (2 sheets)! W! M. nervosa Bongard ex Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 370.
1841.—"Brazil, Pohl; Minas Geraes, Claussen, [Riedel, misit] Langsdorff."
—Lectotypus, the plant to which Bongard applied the epithet nervosa, i.e., Riedel 22 ex herb, petrop.,
from Sa. da Lapa, Minas Gerais, K!; probable isotypus, Riedel 913 e Sa. da Lapa, C!-The syntypi, Pohl d.l463 = 3284, +B = F Neg. 1345, K (labelled "Riberao do Frada [centr. Minas Gerais]! represent var. hirsutissima.
M. barbigera var. erecta Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 322.
1876.—"... in provincia Goyaz inter Concei9ao et Natividade: BurcheU n. 8200."—Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1801.
M. vestita var., Bentham in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 321.
1876.-"Legit BurcheU inter Cavalcante et Concei§ao [nearrioPalma, ± 12''30'S] sub n. 8122."
- Vidi GH! K! M. barbigera sensu Bentham, 1876: 322.
Either weakly aculeate or unarmed, differing from var. hirsutissima essentially only in vesture; stems (2-)4-20 dm; pinnae aU 1-, mostly 2-, or MAP 64.
Tropical and warm-temperate South America.
Range ofM. hirsutissima Martius var. hirsutissima.
2-3-jug; cauline setae to 2-7(-9) mm; lfts glabrous facially or the proximal 1-3 pairs sometimes thinly strigulose dorsally.
In campo, at edge of cerrado thickets on sandstone, and (especially w.-ward) in wet sandy meadows or waterlogged brejo, (350-)400-1200 m, localized, within the range of var. hirsutissima, on the Brazilian Planalto, from ± 10°S in n.- w. Bahia and n.-centr. Goias s.-w. to the Arguaia-Paraguai divide in s. Mato Grosso, and e. intermptedly to Sa. do Espinha?© between 16°30' and 18°40'S in n.-centr. Minas Gerais, n. to the Balsas valley in s. Maranhao.—Fl. (VIII-)X-III. Map 65.
The nomenclaturally typical populations of var. barbigera from east-central Goias have relatively short stems (to ±6 dm), either ascending or perhaps (as Bentham thought) erect.
Also in central MIMOSA HIRSUTISSIMA (in part) var. BARBIGERA # var. GROSSA • MAP 65.
Planaltine Brazil.
Ranges ofM hirsutissima Martius var. barbigera (Bentham) Bameby and var. grossa Bameby.
Goias and exclusively further west in Mato Grosso the variety is represented by a humifuse form with erratically radicant stems, encountered in brejo or swampy grassland (Anderson 11337, Irwin 16631, NY), and interpreted as an ecotype.
In northem Minas Gerais is found a robust form with leaflets attaining 10-21 x 3-6 mm (Irwin 23795, 23878, 27108, NY).
In an early stage of this revision I annotated some of these as unpublished varieties of M. nervosa.
415c. Mimosa hirsutissima Martius var. grossa Bameby, Brittonia 37: 152.
1985.-"BrazU.
Goias: Corrego Estrema in Sa. do Morcego, 40 km NE of Formosa, 20 Apr 1966 (fl, frjun), Irwin (with Souza, Reis dos Santos & Grear) 15109.—Holotypus, UB; isotypus.
NY! Procumbent, the mature stems only 4-6 dm, unarmed or inconspicuously armed at random nodes; cauline setae to 2-5 mm; petioles 3-22 mm; pinnae of aU lvs 1-jug., the rachis 4-6 cm; lfts 5-11-jug., pilosulous on both faces, the larger ones 12-20 x 5-9 mm; peduncles 5-10.5 cm; pods ±5 mm wide, the valves both pubemlent and setulose, the setae of replum sometimes minutely scaberulous.
In cerrado, 500-800 m, local in far w. Bahia (Rio das Ondas, e. slope of Espigao Mestre) and e.-centr. Goias (Sa. do Morcego), in lat. 12- 15°S.-n. I-IV. Map 65.
416.
Mimosa pogonoclada Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 399 (loc. 'Parana' excepto).
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 321, descr. ampliat.
1876. —"Habitat in provincia S. Paulo ad Uberaba: RegneU III n. 499; ad Cuiaba et Camapuam prov. Matto Grosso: Riedel."
-Lectotypus, coUected 18.
XII.1848 (fl), RegneU HI/499, K! = NY Neg. 1798; syntypus, Riedel s.n.,
not seen (not at K in 1986).
Unarmed perennial herb with humistrate, randomly branched stems to 7 dm or more, these with lf-axes and peduncles densely coarsely setose throughout with subvertical, almost straight tapering setae to 2-3.5(-4) mm, the olivaceous bmnnescent lvs sub-bicolored, the lfts glabrous above, beneath thinly strigulose-setulose and a little paler, immarginate but hispid-cUiate, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary and paired in a long succession of If-axils on peduncle as long as or longer than the associated If.
Stipules erect firm lanceolate 4-5 x 1-1.5 mm, pubemlent on both faces, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leafstalks (1.5-)2-3.5 cm, the proper petiole including pulvinus 7-15 x 0.5-0.8 mm, the longer interpinnal segments 5-7 mm, the shallow ventral groove bridged between pinnae but spicules 0; pinnae 4-jug., a little decrescent distally, the axis of longer ones 14-30 mm, the interfoliolar segments 1.2-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 10-17- jug., subequilong, the first pair less than I mm distant from lanceolate paraphyllidia 0.6-1 mm, the blades obliquely oblong or half-ovate from obtusangulate base, abmptly deltate-apiculate mucronulate, the larger ones 4.5-6.5 x 1.4-2 mm, 2.5-3.5 times as long as wide, all veinless and dull above, beneath sharply 5-6-nerved from pulvinule, the simple midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2-2.5, the one anterior primary nerve weak submarginal or lacking, the inner posterior one produced nearly to blade apex, the outer posterior ones progressively shorter, the venation pallid and sharply defined.
Peduncles strongly compressed 4-5.5 cm; capitula without filaments 6-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtusely 4-angulate fl-buds microscopically puberulent at tip; receptacle densely setose; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1.7-2 x 0.3-0.5 mm, dorsally glabrous and carinate, setose-ciUate distally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx paleaceous 1.8-2.6 mm, the tube 0.5-0.8 mm, the four scarious lobes decompound ± half-way into tapering setae; corolla narrowly funnelform 4-ribbed 2.5- 3.1 mm, the firm ovate cymbiform lobes 0.5-0.9 mm; filaments monadelphous through 1-1.5 mm, exserted to 7 mm.
Pods (Krapovickas 33074, NY) to 10 per capitulum, sessile, in profile Unearoblong to 15 X 5 mm and 2-3-seeded, the undulately constricted replum ±0.3 mm diam., hispid on back and sides with tapering smooth setae to 3 mm, the papery valves brown glabrous, breaking up into free-falling articles to ± 5 mm long. In campo near 300-400 m, apparently localized in the Triangulo of w. Minas Gerais, known precisely only from near Uberaba and Frutal (±20°S, 48^9°W).-n. XII-II. Mimosa pogonoclada, which is known to me from only one collection besides the type, can be visualized as a smaU-leaved, unarmed version of M. hirsutissima, which it closely resembles in leaflet-venation and floral morphology.
Its leaves are rather smaller than those ofM hirsutissima, and composed of up to four pairs ofpinnae which are not crowded near tip of leaf-stalk, thereby imparting a certain individuality of facies.
Judgment as to its independent specific status must be suspended until more can be learned of its habits and potential variability.
In general aspect it simulates M. distans var. elongata, but its corolla-lobes lack the silvery retrorse indumentum characteristic of subser. Reptantes.
417.
Mimosa vestita Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 369.
1841.-"BrazU, Pohr\ the localitydata expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 320.
1876 to: "in provincia Goyaz prope capitalem [=Goias Velho]."-Holotypus, Pohl d.2089 = 1415 from "Villa Boa [=Goias Velho]," K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1796; isotypi, F (s.n.)! = F Neg. 54873, NY! W! M. vestita sensu Bentham, 1875: 398. (?) M. conferta sensu Glaziou, 1906: 179, ex parte (21057, G, K, P, in bud only and inflorescence branched); non Bentham.
Unarmed, functionally herbaceous subshrubs with erect or assurgent simple stems attaining nearly 1 m, densely foliate to or beyond middle with readily deflexed, very shortly petiolate lvs and passing upward into an efoliate pseudoraceme or few-branched panicle ofglobose capitula rising ±1-2.5 dm beyond foliage, the stems, lvs and inflorescence-axes both pubemlent and hirsute throughout with minute hairs and fine, smooth or microscopically scabemlous, flexuously spreading setae to ±1.5-2 mm, the olivaceous lfts either subconcolorous and hirsute overall or glabrous facially and somewhat paler beneath, the margin densely discontinuously setose-ciliate.
Stipules erect, linear-lanceolate 3.5- 6 X 0.4-0.5 mm, dorsally pubescent like stem, glabrous within, persistent or tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks 5.5-13 mm, the petiole and Uvid pulvinus together (1.5-)2-5 mm, the one interpinnal segment laterally compressed and (1-) 1.5-8 mm; spicules 0; pinnae of most lvs 2-jug. (of some small distal lvs 1-jug., no further described), the distal pair longer, the rachis of these 2-5.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments (1.5-)2-5 mm; lfts of distal pinnae 10-15-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the unequal first pair close to pulvinus (paraphyUidia 0), the blades obUquely ovate or semi-ovate from broadly semicordate base, apiculate at broad apex, those at mid-rachis (5-)6-10 X 2.5-4 mm, 2.1-2.5 times as long as wide, aU veinless above, beneath 3-4-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib either simple or 1-2- branched beyond middle, the inner posterior nerve expiring well beyond mid-blade, the outer 1-2 posterior nerves successively shorter.
Peduncles solitary ±2-4.5 cm; capitula without filaments 7-7.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the 4-costate 4-sulcate fl-buds minutely pubemlent or glabrous; receptacle densely pilose; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1.8-2.2 x 0.25-0.4 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx paleaceous 2-2.5 mm, the stramineous lobes united into a narrowly campanulate tube 1.2-1.5 mm, their free blade shallowly fimbriate-decompound; corolla ±3.5 mm, the callous cymbiform lobes ±1 x 0.7 mm; filaments pink, drying brown, monadelphous through 1-1.7 mm, exserted to 5 mm.
Pods (not seen, perhaps overlooked at K) described by Bentham (1876, I.e.) as ± 17 x 6 mm, 2-seeded, the replum short-setose, the valves densely retrostrigose with subappressed longer and shorter setae, either disarticulating or not.
In unrecorded habitats, but to be expected in open campo cerrado near 700-1000 m, apparently local and not encountered in recent years, collected by Burchell and Glaziou in five stations high on the sources of rio Tocantins in s.-centr. Goias, Brazil, from the valley of rio Palma near 12°30'S s. and s.-w. to Sa.
Geral do Parana near 15°S and the city of Goias Velho near 16°S.-H. ±XII-II(-?).
The poorly known M. vestita has the leaf-formula, leaflet-venation and paleaceous calyx of M. hirsutissima, but is unarmed (so far as known) and differs conspicuously in the virgate habit of growth, the stem being densely foliate below the middle and the inflorescence thence far exserted and efoliate.
In habit, paleaceous calyx, and callous corolla-lobes it is compatible with the large planaltine group of species allied to M. radula, but these have leaves stabilized at exactly one pair of pinnae.
The combination of characters displayed by M. vestita is a puzzling one, but on balance the similarities with the Hirsutae appear stronger and may indicate the real relationship of the species.
418.
Mimosa digitata Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker)4: 368.
1841.-"Brazil,Po/z/."
, the localitydata expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 318.
1876 to: ".
.
. provinciae Goyaz .
.
. inter Barrera do Mato et Riberao Moribunda [perhaps Corgo Barreiro do Mato, near Caldas Novas, crossed by Pohl m V. 1820]."-Holotypus, Pohl d.l401 = 2658, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 7792; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54828, NY! W! M. digitata sensu Bentham, 1875: 398.
Virgately erect or less often diffusely trailing subshrubs 1-1.5 m, the stems clothed in relatively small, short-petiolate, palmately pinnate microphyllidious lvs and armed at most nodes by a pair of straight or recurved stramineous, hornlike or broad-based aculei 1^.5 mm and occasionally between nodes by a similar postpetiolar aculeus, the young stems, lf-stks and axes of inflorescence densely hirsute with erect, straight or incurved, sordid or yellowish subcapillary setae to 0.7-1.3 mm, the foliage olivaceous subconcolorous, the lfts glabrous above, beneath thinly silky-strigose, thinly ciliate with fine forwardly ascending setae not retroconfluent into a continuous margin, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary or sometimes geminate in a long succession of If-axils, forming an at first exserted but hysteranthously foliate pseudoraceme becoming 1.5-4 dm.
Stipules firm erectincurved, Unear-attenuate 3-5 x 0.3-0.5 mm, 1-nerved, densely or thinly hirsute-setose dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 5-23 mm, the petiole almost as long, at middle 0.4-0.6 mm diam., the pulvini of 3-4 pairs of palmately radiating pinnae commonly contiguous, rarely separated by intervals to 0.5 mm; pinnae subequilong or the distal ones slightly longer, the rachis of longer ones 1.5-3.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5- 1.3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 17-24-jug., decrescent toward each end of rachis, the first pair 0.1-0.8 mm distant from Unear-attenuate paraphyllidia (0.5-)0.7-1.4 mm, aU in outline narrowly oblong or Unear-oblong from semicordate or broadly obtusangulate base, abmptly acute mucronulate, straight or a little curved forward, those near mid-rachis 3-5(-6) x 0.7-1 (-1.3) mm, 4.2-5.2 times as long as wide, all smooth veinless above, beneath weakly 2-3(-4)-nerved from pulvinule, the prominulous simple midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the adjacent posterior nerve expiring below mid-blade, the outer l(-2) posterior nerves very short or obscure.
Peduncles 1.5-3 cm; capitula without filaments 6-7.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the glabrous fl-buds deeply 4-sulcate lengthwise; bracts linearoblanceolate 1.7-2.4 x 0.2-0.4 mm, setose-ciliolate distaUy, deciduous with unfertilized fls; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some or many lower ones staminate; calyx pappiform 0.8-1.7 mm, the membranous tube 0.15-0.3 mm, the limb decompound almost or quite to base into capillary pallid setae; corollas narrowly vase-shaped 2.4-3.3 mm, the compressed-cymbiform subcaUous, dorsally keeled lobes 0.6-1 x 0.4-0.7 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.4- I mm, exserted 4-7 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods (not well known) 1-3 from near top of receptacle, subsessile, in profile undulately Unear-oblong 15-25 X 5 mm, 3-6-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.3-0.5 mm wide, thinly hispidulous with forwardly ascending setulae to 0.5 mm, contracted at apex into a minute cusp, the stiffly papery, remotely pubemlent valves becoming dark brown and breaking up into freefalling indehiscent articles 3.5^.5 mm long; seeds (of type) obtusely rhomboid biconvex 3.8 x 3.5 mm, the smooth testa fuscous sublustrous.
In campo cerrado at 700-950 m, scattered over highland s.-centr. and s.-e. Goias, Brazil (Sa. do Pirineus to Caldas and Catalao) and closely adj. w. Minas Gerais (Paracatu).—Fl.
I-III. Mimosa digitata and M. ruftpila have nearly the same planaltine range and many morphological features in common, so are not readily distinguished at first sight.
From modem collections by Heringer and Irwin it has been learned that while the stems of M. digitata are nearly always aculeate, those of Af. ruftpila are only exceptionally and randomly so.
The leaf-formula is nearly the same in both, but pinnae and leaflets o f M digitata are shorter and its more crowded leaflets are only weakly 2-3 (not 4-6)-nerved dorsally, with simple (not branched) midrib.
The calyx ofM. digitata is symmetrically pappiform and its corolla-lobes are comeously thickened and strongly involute even in praefloration, whereas the calyx ofM. ruftpila is asymmetrical and the corolla-lobes are membranous and only shallowly concave.
In the callous and involute corolla-lobes, and consequently 4-sulcate flowerbuds, M. digitata resembles the also sympatric M. vestita, but this is more easily distinguished by relatively few and larger leaflets and by the virgately exserted pseudoraceme of capitula.
419.
Mimosa rufipila Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 368.
1841.-"BrazU, Pohl.'', the localitydata expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 319.
1876 to: ".
.
. in provinciae Goyaz Serra dos Christaes ad [inter] Patrocinio et S. Luzia "-Holotypus, Pohl d.l476 = 738, K (2 sheets)!,
one = NY Neg. 1793; isotypi, +B = FNeg.
1376, F! = FNeg.
54861, M! NY! W! M. echinocarpa Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 398.
1875 & in Martius, H. bras. 15(2): 320, descr. ampliat.
1876.— ".
.
. inter Rio Bonifacio et Estiva provinciae Goyaz [±15*'-16°S, 49°W]: BurcheU, n. 7471; ad Paracatu prov. Minas Geraes: Lund."
-Lectotypus, Burchell 7471, K! = NY Neg. 1795; syntypi, Lund s.n.,
IX. 1834, C (2 sheets)!,
one = F Neg. 21877, NY! M. ruftpila sensu Bentham, 1875: 398; 1876: 318.
Functionally herbaceous subshrubs from oblique knotty rootstock, at anthesis 2-7.5 (reportedly attaining 15) dm, the virgately erect or less often diffuse assurgent, simple or proximally few-branched stems, lf-stks and peduncles densely hirsute with fine erect tapering, sordid or rufous setae to 1.5-4 mm mixed with minute pallid pubemlence, usually unarmed but some individual plants randomly aculeate at the nodes like M. digitata, the olivaceous bmnnescent foliage subconcolorous, the firm plane lfts glabrous on upper face, usually thinly silky-strigose dorsally but sometimes glabrous, ciliate with fine, narrowly ascending setae not retroconfluent into a margin, the globose or more often ellipsoid capitula solitary or rarely geminate in the axil of coevally or hysteranthously expanding lvs, in fmit lateral, the peduncle always much longer than the subtending lf-stk. Stipules erect firm, lanceolate or lance-attenuate 3-7 x 0.7-1.3 mm, coarsely 3-5-nerved, densely setose or glabrescent dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including pulvinus 2-22(-25) mm, progressively shorter up the stem, the tme petiole almost as long, at middle 0.5-0.9 mm diam., grooved both ventrally and laterally, the 2-3(-4) pairs of pinnae subpalmate from apex, their pulvini contiguous; pinnae usually a little accrescent distally, the rachis of furthest pair (2-)2.5-6(-6.5) cm, the interfoliolar segments 1.5-3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (13-) 16-23-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.4-1.5 mm distant from linear-lanceolate or subsetiform paraphylUdia (0.7-) 1-2.4 mm, the blades obliquely lanceolate or subdimidiately ovate from semicordate or broadly obtusangulate base, acute or acuminulate, those at mid-rachis 5.5-8.5 x 1.4-2.5 mm, 3-4.5 times as long as wide, all smooth above (the immersed venation faintly discolored), prominently palUd-venulose beneath, 4-6-nerved from pulvinule, the straight or gently incurved midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2-4, severalbranched from near or below middle, the inner posterior nerve produced well beyond mid-blade, the outer ones progressively shorter.
Peduncles (1.6-)2-5.5 cm; capitula without filaments 7-8.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike hispidulous; bracts elliptic-acuminate 2-3 X 0.5-0.9 mm, beyond middle setulose dorsally and setoseciliate, each closely embracing a fl; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx pappiform-paleaceous ±1-1.5 mm, strongly asymmetric or spathiform, wanting on ^4-^2 posterior periphery of fl, the anterior side irregularly lobed or setose-decompound, sometimes almost to base; corollas very narrowly vase-shaped 2.6-3 mm, the shallowly concave, weakly carinate and not callous-thickened lobes 0.55-0.8 x 0.4-0.5 mm, minutely gray-hispidulous extemally; filaments pink fading dark brown, weakly monadelphous through 0.6-1.2 mm, exserted 4.5-5.5 mm.
Pods usually several per capitulum but not forming a dense sphere, sessile, in profile oblong or eUiptic-oblong 13-20 x 4-5 mm, mostly 3- 4-seeded, the shallowly constricted or almost straight replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, densely hispid with stiff tapering, widely ascending and divaricate, stramineous or mfescent setae of different lengths, the longest attaining 4.5-6 mm, the papery, minutely pubemlent and sometimes incipiently retro-strigulose valves breaking up into free-falling biconvex indehiscent articles 5-6 mm long; seeds lentiform ±4 x 3.3 mm, the testa reddish-ochraceous smooth dull.
In campo cerrado and campo sujo at ±800- 1000 m, apparently local in e. and s.-centr. Goias, adj. Minas Gerais and Distrito Federal within 45°30'^9°W and 14°-18°S in planaltine BrazU.—Fl.
XII-IX; fr.
III-IX, the empty repla long persisting.
For discussion see M. digitata, immediately preceding.
420.
Mimosa macrocephala Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 398.
1875 & /« Martius, FI. bras. 15(2): 320, descr. ampliat.
1876.- "Habitat inter Goyaz et Cavalcante: BurcheU n. 7518 et 7694."-Lectotypus, Burchell 7518, collected between Ribeirao dos Macacos and Olhos de Agua, near 16°S, 48°40'W, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1794; syntypus, Burchell 7694, collected between rio Bagagem and rio da Serra, near 14°20'S, 48°W, K! Erect, amply leafy, functionally herbaceous unarmed subshrubs 3-7 dm from xylopodium, the few simple stems, lf-axes and peduncles hispid with erect tapering mfescent setae to 4.5-5.5 mm mixed with minute pubemlence, the olivaceous foliage subconcolorous, the dorsally venose lfts pubemlent or finely pilosulous on both faces and in addition thinly appressed-setose dorsally, ciliate with widely ascending setae not retrodecurrent into a continuous margin, the ellipsoid capitula solitary on stout ascending peduncle much longer than subtending petiole, often as long as or longer than the whole If.
Stipules erect firm reddish-brown lanceolate-acuminate 7-11 X 1.2-2.2mm, coarsely 3-6-nerved, setose on back and margin, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including discolored pulvinus 4-30(-35) mm, progressively shorter upward along stem, at middle 0.5-1.2 mm diam., the petiole almost or quite as long; pinnae of few early (often deciduous) lvs 1-jug. but of all middle and distal lvs 2-jug., the pulvini of the two pairs subcontiguous, the pinnae palmately spreading, recurved in sleep, the rachis of distal, usually longer pair (3-)4.5-8.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 3-6.5 mm; lfts of distal pinnae (6-)10-16(-17)-jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis or only proximally, the first, often unequal pair 1.3-3 mm distant from narrowly lance-attenuate paraphyllidia 1.3-3 mm, all in outline obliquely ovateor lance-elUptic from broadly semicordate base, mucronulateapiculate, those near mid-rachis 11-16 x 4-7 mm, 2-3.3 times as long as wide, all 5-6-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ± 1:2-2.5,4-6-branched on each side from near middle upward, its posterior neighbor and the weaker submarginal anterior nerve brochidodrome well beyond mid-blade, the outer posterior ones much shorter.
Peduncles widely or narrowly ascending 4-11 cm; capitula without filaments 8.5-10 mm diam., nearly twice as long, prior to anthesis conelike and hispid with bracteal setae; bracts Unear-attenuate 2-4 x 0.25- 0.5 mm, long-ciliate distally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate or neuter and much smaller than the rest (no further described); calyx paleaceous spathiform 1.2-2.2 mm, asymmetrically developed on anterior side of fl, very short or obsolete on posterior side, the l-2(-3) developed lobes irregularly setiform-decompound; bisexual corollas narrowly vaseshaped (2.8-)3-4.3 mm, the ovate apiculate navicular lobes 0.7-1 X 0.5-0.7 mm, weakly keeled and not thickened; filaments pink drying brown, monadelphous through 0.6-1.1 mm, exserted 3 - 4.5 mm.
Pods ±3-12 per capitulum, in profile Unear-oblong, including stout terminal cusp 25- 33 X 5.5-7(-7.5) mm, mostly 3-4-seeded, the undulately constricted replum 0.5-0.8 mm wide, densely hispid with stout pluriseriate, divaricate or ascending, tapering or flagelliform, stramineous sometimes brown-tipped setae to 5-7 mm, the firmly papery reddish-brown glabrous valves breaking up when ripe into free-falling biconvex articles 5-8 mm long; seeds plumply lenticular, in broad view ± 5 x 4 mm, the testa dull reddishbrown, smooth.
On sandy or rocky soils in cerrado at ±700- 800 m, apparently local on both slopes of the Maranhao-Commba watershed between 14°30' and 16°S in centr. Goias.-R. XII-II. Bentham considered M. macrocephala distinct from other members of his ser. Hirsutae because of its ellipsoid rather than subspherical capitula, but it is now known that other so-called Hirsutae, including the very closely related M. procurrens, may have flower-heads longer than wide.
Mimosa procurrens and M. macrocephala are alike in indumentum, foliage, corolla and craspedium, the most immediately striking difference being in habit of growth, the former having pliantly humifuse stems whereas the latter is erect.
Closer scmtiny reveals that the calyx o f M macrocephala is better developed on the flower's posterior side, where it is plainly paleaceous, whereas the equivalent lobe in M. procurrens may be reduced to a few random setae.
Both species are known to occur in Goias on upper forks of rio Commba in the foothills of Sa. dos Pirineus, but M. macrocephala extends northward from there to the sources of rio Maranhao and M. procurrens eastward into Distrito Federal.
They are not known to occur in direct association where their ranges overlap and they appear to be sibling species, doubtless differentiated from a common progenitor but now effectively vicariant in dispersal.
Fieldwork is required to determine whether the separation is as abmpt as it now appears.
421.
Mimosa procurrens Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 371.
1841.-"Brazil, Pohl.'', the locality elaborated in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 322.
1876: "in provincia Goyaz ad Montes Claros."
-Holotypus, Pohld.1378 = 1212, K (hb. Benth.)!; isotypi (some labelled "Sta Luzia"), +B = F Neg. 1360, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1799, M! W! M. procurrens sensu Bentham, 1875: 399; 1876: 322; Glaziou, 1906: 178 (21042, P!).
Functionally herbaceous from knotty xylopodium, the weak, pliantly humifiise, unarmed, fewbut large-lvd simple stems l-4(-5) dm, together with lf-stks, peduncles and Ift-margins hispid with slender tapering setae to 3-7 mm long and at base 0.1-0.2 mm diam., the stems and lf-stks in addition minutely pubemlent, the foliage olivaceous concolorous, highly sensitive to touch, the plane, firmly papery lfts glabrous and almost smooth above, beneath prominently venulose and often thinly setose.
Stipules firm erect castaneous, broadly lanceolate or lance-acuminate 4- 8 X 0.8-2 mm, striately 4-8-nerved dorsally, setose dorsally or only setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (0.8-)!^ cm, at middle obcompressed and 0.8-1.4 mm wide, the interpinnal segments not over 1(-1.5) mm; pinnae 1-3-, of most lvs palmately 2-3-jug., the distal pair usually longest, the rachis of these 5-8.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 4-7(-10) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (9-)10-19(-22)-jug., the first pair 1.5- 4 mm distant from 1-2 narrowly lanceolate or linear-attenuate paraphyllidia 1.2-2.4 mm, the blades obliquely ovate or lance-elUptic from broadly semicordate base, abmptly apiculate, those near mid-rachis (9-) 10-16 x (3-)3.5-5.5 mm, 2.2-3.3 times as long as wide, all (5-)6-7- nerved from pulvinus, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the inner primary nerve on either side of midrib produced almost to blade apex, the outer primary ones progressively shorter, all connected by a reticulum of secondary and tertiary venules, the spreading marginal setae not retroconfluent.
Peduncles (4-)5-l 1 cm, much surpassing the subtending lf-stk and often but not always the pinnae also; capitula plumply ellipsoid or subglobose, without filaments 8-10.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike and hispid; bracts subscarious linear or Unear-lanceolate 2- 3.5 mm, beyond middle setose-ciliate, sometimes minutely setulose dorsally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, heteromorphic, some lower ones often small, relatively broad and imperfect, the middle and upper ones either bisexual or in part staminate and cylindric-vase-shaped; calyx consisting of one deeply decompound lobe or fringe of few setae to 0.5-1 mm on adaxial side of fl; coroUa membranous, the longer ones 3.4-3.9 mm, the apically incurved lobes 1-1.4 x 0.5-0.8 mm; filaments pink drying dark brown, monadelphous through 0.6-1.8 mm, exserted 6-7 mm; ovary glabrous.
Pods erect-ascending, to six per capitulum, sessile, in profile Unear-oblong 20-26 X 4.5-6 mm, abmptly cuspidate at apex, the shallowly sinuate replum 0.4-0.5 mm wide, armed on back and sides with several files of spreading setae 2-5.5 mm, the firmly papery glabrous valves tuming reddish-brown sublustrous, when fully ripe breaking up into 3-5 free-falling, plumply biconvex, tardily dehiscent articles 3.7- 5.6 mm long; seeds (few seen) lentiform ±3.5 x 2.7 mm, the testa dull brown.
In campo sujo subject to fire, on sandstone and laterite, sometimes in low moist places (brejo) but often in drier porous soils, 900-1150 m, locally plentiful on and about the sources of rio Commba in the s.-w. quarter of Distrito Federal and adj. s.-e. Goias, BrazU.-Fl. (VII-)X-II; fr.
I-V. Mimosa procurrens, which was known to Bentham through one sample only, is now well documented by ten modem collections, all from the headwaters of the Commba river in southeastem Goias and the southwestern quarter of the Federal District.
Its evidently close relationship to M. macrocephala is discussed under that species (p. 700).
Records ofM. procurrens from Argentina are based on material of the less closely related M. caaguazuensis, which see for comment.
422.
Mimosa monadelpha Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 553 (=P1. hassler.
409).
1904.—Typus sub var. monadelpha infra indicatur.
Erect unarmed subshrubs 5-10 dm, the stems at anthesis defoliate toward base, densely foUate and usually branched distaUy into a pyramidal panicle of subglobose capitula, the stems, lf-stks of palmatipinnate lvs and all axes of inflorescence commonly densely gray-pubemlent and pilose with fine, either shorter ascending or longer spreading, lutescent setae to 1-2 mm long and at base to 0.1-0.15 mm diam., rarely nearly glabrous throughout, the dried foliage dull dark brown, the thin-textured lfts subconcolorous or livid beneath, glabrous on both faces, discontinuously setose-ciliate, the capitula mostly axillary to coevally expanding lvs, some late ones shortly pseudoracemose.
Stipules narrowly lance-attenuate 4-7 X 0.5-0.75 mm, strongly 1-nerved, either pubemlent or glabrous dorsally, setose-ciliolate, persistent.
Petiole of primary cauline lvs 1-3 cm, at middle 0.65-1.4 mm diam., that of some smaller rameal lvs shorter; pinnae of larger lvs 3^-jug., of some diminished distal lvs 2-jug. (no further described), the pairs of pulvini subcontiguous, the If-rachis 2-^ mm; rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-7 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 24-32- jug. (of lowest lvs often fewer), decrescent proximally, the small unequal first pair 0.1-0.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.3-1.3 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from obtusangulate base, abmptly apiculate, those at and beyond mid-rachis 4.5-12 x 1.2-3.5 mm, 3^.3 times as long as wide, all weakly (2-)3-5-nerved from pulvinule, the simple midrib displaced to divide blade 1:1.5-2, the inner posterior nerve expiring beyond mid-blade, the outer ones much shorter, the venation on upper face fully immersed and often imperceptible, on lower face either discolored or faintly raised.
Peduncles solitary or occasionally geminate (7-) 10-29 mm; capitula without filaments 6.5-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the receptacle glabrous, the 4-sulcate fl-buds microscopically papillate at tip; bracts linear or linear-spatulate 1.4-2.4 x 0.25- 0.4 mm, 1-nerved and glabrous dorsally, setulose-ciliolate toward tip; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some proximal ones staminate and smaller; calyx paleaceous pallid (1-) 1.3-1.9 mm, the glabrous brown tube 0.2-0.3 mm, the lobes deeply decompound; corollas narrowly funnelform (2-)2.3-3 mm, the comeously thickened cymbiform lobes 0.8-1.1 x 0.5-0.65 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through 1.2-1.4 mm, exserted 4.5-6.3 mm.
Pods ±2-6 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong 12-24(-25) x 5.5-7.5 mm, broadly rounded at each end, mucronulate at apex, 2-4-seeded, the shaUowly constricted replum 0.3-0.8 mm wide, either densely setose with pluriseriate ascending stramineous setae to ±1.5 mm or appressed-setulose, the papery valves either densely hispid with simUar but more widely incurved-ascending setae to ±3 mm or only thinly strigose, when ripe breaking up into free-falUng, individually dehiscent articles 3-5.5 mm long; seeds (few seen) transverse, compressed-rhomboid-obovoid, in wide profile ±4.5- 6 X 3.5-4.5 mm, the smooth testa lustrous brown.
Mimosa monadelpha is closely akin to M. lupinoides, but has stems twice as tall, has six to eight rather than exactly four pinnae bome subpalmately at tip of each leaf-stalk, and has nearly twice as many leaflets per pinna, these only about half as wide.
Two readily distinguishable pubescence forms have been described.
Key to varieties of M. monadelpha 1.
Stems, lf-axes and peduncles at once gray-pubemlent and pilose with lutescent setae to ± 1- 2 mm; pods densely barbate-hispid overall with subcontiguous ascending setae 1.5-3 mm; Paraguayan Plateau in lat. 26°-26*'30'S and sympatric with the next on Sa. de Amambay 422a. var. monadelpha (p. 703).
1.
Stems, lf-axes and peduncles remotely strigulose or setulose, appearingglabrous; pods thinly finely subappressed-strigose with setae ±1-1.5 mm; Sa. de Amambay in lat. ±22°30'S 422b. var. glabrata (p. 703).
422a. Mimosa monadelpha Chodat & Hassler var. monadelpha.
M. monadelpha Chodat & Hassler, 1904, I.e., sens, str.—"[Paraguay:].
.
. in campo silvatico Yemti, Dec. [Hassler] n. 5795."-Holotypus, G! = F Neg. 28223; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 57279, K! NY! P! W! M. amambayensis Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9:13.1910.—"Paraguay: In campis siccis Punta Pora, flor. mens. Dec, Hassler no. 9926."—Holotypus, G!,
isotypi, GH! P! W! M. monadelpha var. hirsuto-puberula Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 14.
1910.—"Paraguay: In campis pr. Caaguazu, flor. et fruct. mens. Mart.; Hassler no. 9245flor.et 9245a fmct."
-Syntypi, G!; isosyntypi, NY! P! W! As described for the species except as modified in key to varieties.
In campo at ±250-350 m on the Paraguayan Plateau, especially in the yerbales of Yhu and Caaguazu near 26°-26°30'S, 56°W; and also known from two collections, one at 750 m, from Sa. de Amambay near 22°30'S.-H. XII-II. 422b. Mimosa monadelpha Chodat & Hassler var. glabrata (Hassler) Bameby, comb. nov. M. amambayensis var. glabrata Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 9: 13.
1910.- "Paraguay: In campis pr. Esperanza, fmct. mens. April.; Hassler no. 10348, leg. Rojas."
— Holotypus, G!; isotypus, GH! Different from var. monadelpha in glabrate stems, leaf-stalks and peduncles, and in the thinly finely strigulose-setose, nigrescent (not densely pallid-setose-comose) pod.
In low bmsh on campo, at unrecorded elevations, known only from e.-centr. Paraguay in deptos.
Concepci6n and Amambay near lat. 22°30'-23°30'S.-Fl. ±XII-I. This was described by Hassler as viscidulous, but I could find no secretory trichomes on the specimens.
423.
Mimosa lupinoides Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 489 (=P1. hassler.
403).
1904.—"[Paraguay:] in campo Ipe-hu, Sierra de Maracayu, Oct., [Hassler] n. 4978; in alto planitie pr. flumen Carimbatay, Sept. [Hassler] n. 4544a."—Lectotypus, Hassler 4978, G!; syntypi, 4544a, G! = F Neg. 28219, GH! F! = F Neg. 54846, K! NY! S! W ! - M . nervosa var. lupinoides (Chodat & Hassler) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 559.
1910.
M. nervosa var. lupinoides fma ferruginea Hassler, 1910, I.e., nom. superfl. M. lupinoides fma glabrescens Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 489 (=P1. hassler.
403).
1904.- " [Paraguay:] in campo pr. flumen Carimbatay .
.
. [Hassler] n. 4544."-Holotypus, G!; isotypi, NY! S! W!—M nervosa var. lupinoides fma glabrescens (Chodat & Hassler) Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 559.
1910.
M. nervosa var. lupinoides fma hirsuta Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 559.
1910.-"Paraguay.
.
. cum forma [glabrescenti], Hassler no. 4544a; in campis pr. Caaguazu . .. Hassler no. 9219."—Lectotypus, Hassler 9219, G!; isotypi, GH! NY! W!; syntypi, 4544a, supra sub M. lupinoide citantur.
Unarmed, amply few-leaved, functionally herbaceous subshrubs from xylopodium, at anthesis 2-4 dm, the simple erect-ascending stems floriferous from 4-10 nodes beginning below, near, or beyond middle, together with lf-stks and long solitary peduncles both puberulent and shaggypUose with slender spreading flexuous setae ±1.5- 2.7 mm and not over 0.2 mm diam. at base, the subpalmately pinnate lvs subconcolorous, the broad thin-textured lfts duU brown-olivaceous and ascending-pilosulous on both faces, ventrally smooth, dorsally palUd-venose.
Stipules erect subherbaceous lanceolate 4-9 x 1-2 mm, pilose dorsally, glabrous striate within, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-55 cm, progressively shorter upward, at middle 0.6-1 mm diam., the ventral groove narrow but open, spicules 0; pinnae (1-)2 (-3)-jug., the interval between pairs 0-2(-4) mm, all equilong or the distal pair a little longer than the rest, the rachis of these 4-6 cm, the interfoliolar segments 4-7 mm; lfts 8-15-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 1- 3 mm distant from lanceor Unear-subulate, green or reddish paraphyllidia 0.6-2 mm, the blades obliquely oblong-elUptic from deeply semicordate base, abmptly deltate-apiculate, those near mid-rachis 8-16 x 3-7 mm, 2.1-2.8 times as long as wide, all dorsally 5-6-nerved from pulvinule, the strong midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, above middle pinnately 2-5-branched on either side, the one anterior nerve shortly intramarginal, produced beyond mid-blade, the stong inner posterior nerve anastomosing with a secondary nervule a little short of blade apex, the outer posterior ones progressively shorter and weaker, a faint tertiary venulation sometimes perceptible.
Peduncles erect 6-12(-16) cm; capitula without filaments or bracteal setae 5-9 mm diam., the obtuse gray-pubemlent fl-buds prior to anthesis equaled or concealed by setae; bracts Unear-attenuate 3-4 x 0.4-0.6 mm, toward apex setose on back and margins with fine setae to 1- 1.4 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, most or all bisexual; calyx membrano-paleaceous 2-2.7 mm, the lobes setiform-decompound through nearly half their length; corolla narrowly funnelform 3.3-4.2 mm, the scarcely thickened 1 -nerved, shallowly concave lobes 0.7-1.1 x 0.5- 0.9 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.8-1.5 mm, exserted 6-9 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods (few seen) 1-few per capitulum, subsessile, in profile narrowly oblong 17-22 x 6.5-8 mm, 3-4-seeded, the replum 0.5-0.7 mm wide, weakly hispid-setose, the stiffly papery pale brown valves low-convex over each seed, pubemlent and densely hispid overall with retroarcuate smooth, either coarsely bulbous or finely tapering stramineous setae to 1-2.5 mm, when ripe breaking up into free-falling articles 5-6 mm long; seeds (1 seen) compressed-obovoid 5 x 4 mm, the testa dull fuscous-brown.
In open campo near 250-350 m, local in e. Paraguay and adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil, in lat. ±22°30-25°30'S, from near Ponta Pora s. and s.-w. in Paraguay to Alto Parana and Caaguazu.-Fl.
XI-VI. Mimosa lupinoides is related on the one hand to M. monadelpha and on the other to M. caaguazuensis; for comments on the differential characters see these kindred species.
Hassler's formae of M. lupinoides appear inconsequential in the light of subsequent collections, and his subordination of the species to M. nervosa illadvised.
The form of M. hirsutissima that impinges on the range of M. lupinoides is handily distinguished by humifuse stems and much smaller leaflets.
424.
Mimosa caaguazuensis Bameby, sp. nov., foUomm majomm pinnis subpalmatim 2-jugis, foliolis amplis, calycisque forma M. lupinoidi proxime accedens, sed ab ea, etsi sympatrica, caulium, petiolomm necnon foliolomm marginis pube e setis erectis 2-5.5 mm usque longis constanti, foliolisque magnis, majoribus 11-32 x 6.5-15 (nec 8-16 x 1.6-3.7) mm metientibus utraque facie glabris (nec pilosulis) diversa; a M. procurrenti, quacum hucusque confusa est, imprimis foliolis 4-9 (nec 10-22)-jugis, calyce membranaceo spathiformi, necnon leguminis valvulis dense retroscabris (nec glabris) diversa.—Paraguay.
Caaguazu: Caaguazu, sur les colUnes incultes, 7.
XI.1874 (fr), B. Balansa 1833.-Ylolotypus, P = NY Neg. 11815.-Ihid.,
III.1905 (fl), E. Hassler 9279(2.—Paratypus, G. M. nervosa var. macrophylla Hassler, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 8: 559.
1910.-"Paraguay: In campis pr. Caaguazu, fruct. mens. Mart.; Hassler no. 9264."-Holotypus, G! M. procurrens sensu M. Micheli, 1883: 53; Burkart, 1948: 156, fig. 24; non Bentham.
Dwarf unarmed macrophyllidious herbs from subterranean caudex surmounting a woody root, the prostrate-assurgent simple stems 5-30 cm bearing 2-4 ample, mostly pedately 2-jugate lvs and 1-2 axillary long-pedunculate globose capitula, the stems, lf-stks and peduncles all hispid with erect slender tapering setae 2-5.5 mm, the foliage subconcolorous olivaceous, the broad plane, dorsally nervose lfts glabrous facially except for a few proximal lfts of some lvs randomly appressed-setose.
Stipules erect, lanceolate or oblanceolate 5-9 x (i.3_)2-3 mm, the foUaceous blade glabrous and several-nerved facially, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-5 x 0.8-1.4 mm, openly sulcate ventrally, the one interpinnal segment not over 1 mm; pinnae of most lvs 2-, or in some lvs of some plants 1-jug., the distal pair longer, their rachis 3-9 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 6-15 mm; lfts (4-)5-9-jug., distally accrescent, the small first pair 2-6 mm distant from Unear-lanceolate paraphyllidia 1.2- 2 mm, the blades obliquely ovate or ovate-elliptic from broadly shallowly semicordate base, deltately apiculate, those at and beyond mid-rachis 11-32 X 6.5-15 mm, 1.8-2.2 times as long as wide, all 6-9-nerved from pulvinule, the pinnately branched midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, flanked on each side by a strong nerve brochidodromous a little short ofblade apex, one anterior outer and 2-4 posterior primary nerves progressively shorter and weaker, all giving rise to an open tertiary reticulum, the venation perceptible but only weakly raised above, beneath pallid and sharply prominulous.
Peduncles erect (4-)6-l 2 cm, strongly compressed; capitula without filaments 10-12 mm diam., prior to anthesis almost conelike, the purple-tipped bracts emergent between pubemlent obtuse fl-buds; bracts linear-oblanceolate ±3-4 x 0.3-0.5 mm, 1-nerved, setose-ciliate above middle; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, all or most bisexual; calyx membranous-hyaline spathaceous 1.5-1.8 mm, the lobe opposed to the associated bract lacking or almost so, the rest lacerate-decompound ± half their length; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 3.5-4 mm, the membranous pallid tube glabrous, the ovate, almost plane reddish 1 -nerved lobes ±0.7 X 0.8 mm, finely pilosulous externally; filaments (? pink) monadelphous through ±1.5 mm around glabrous ovary, exserted 6 mm.
Pods ± 10-20 in a dense cluster, sessile, in profile undulately Unear-oblong, straight or a little incurved (7-) 12-20 X 4-5.5 mm, (1-)2-4-seeded, cuspidulate at apex, the replum 0.5-0.7 mm wide, hispid with several-seriate ascending setae to 1- 1.5 X 0.1 mm, the stiffly papery brown valves low-colliculate over each seed, densely scabrous overall with grossly dilated retrorse commashaped setulae to 0.4-0.7 mm, breaking up when ripe into free-faUing articles 4-6 mm long; ripe seeds unknown.
On stony hiUs and in seasonally dry campo, ±250-450 m, locally plentiful, s.-centr. Paraguay (depto. Caaguazu) and n.-e. Argentina (Misiones), to be expected n. of rio Igua^u in far s.- w. Parana.-Fl.
IX-III(-IV).
Mimosa caaguazuensis is closely related to M. lupinoides, which it resembles in stature, in pinnae crowded at tip of leaf-stalk, and in membranous spathiform calyx, but it is plainly different in the stiff setose pubescence and much larger leaflets, all facially glabrous except for random setulae on back of some proximal ones.
Hassler encountered both species at Caaguazu, where the ranges marginally overlap, and distinguished them in the field, naming M. lupinoides correctly and referring (in adnotation, G) his material of M. caaguazuensis to a variety of M. nervosa.
Burkart later described and illustrated the species with characteristic precision, but perpetuated Micheli's misidentification of the first collection, Balansa 1833, as M. procurrens Bentham.
Genuine M. procurrens, known to Burkart only through Field Museum Negative 1360, is now well documented by long series of modem collections from localities all concentrated in the basin of upper rio Commba in south-central Goias and adjoining Distrito Federal, Brazil.
It differs from M. caaguazuensisparticularly in leaflets nearly twice as many per pinna, in asymmetrically pappiform (not membranous-spathaceous) calyx, and in facially glabrous (not densely retro-scabrous) craspedium.
E(ii.25).
Series MIMOSA subseries BREVIPEDES Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Brevipedes Bameby, subser. nov., hinc subseriei Dolentibus illinc subseriei Polycephalis propinquae, ambabus habitu virgato similes, a primis vix nisi pseudoracemi indeterminati capituUs acropetalim maturescentibus, a secundis calyce minimo (nec paleaceo), coroUae lobulis membranaceis, filamentisque inter se toto vel fere liberis diversae, fructu nunc valvatim dehiscenti nunc articulato (apud nonnuUis speciebus infauste adhuc ignoto) inter Dolentes et Polycephalas vero amphibolae.— Sp. typica: M. brevipes Bentham.
Unarmed, virgately erect subshrubs, often proximally defoliate at anthesis but lacking a woody tmnk, the stems usually densely foliate and passing upward into an efoliate, simple or few-branched pseudoraceme of globose capitula, but lvs of 2 spp. few, distant or subradical; indumentum of minute pubemlence and plain setae, these either smooth, or scabemlous, or in one sp. plumose, and in one sp. mixed with glandtipped setulae; leaf-formula i/(5-)7-24(in M. longiracemosa -45), the lfts either continuously or discontinuously marginate, the larger blades (3.5-)5-26 mm, all dorsally 2-7-nerved; capitula without filaments (4-)5-9 (in M. sceptrum 10- 13) mm diam.; calyx 0.1-0.3 mm, tmncate or obscurely denticulate, glabrous or minutely ciliolate, sometimes essentially 0; corolla 2.1-3.7, or in M. sceptrum and M. cryptogloea 4-4.5 mm, the lobes cymbiform but not or scarcely thickened; filaments free or monadelphous less than 0.5 mm, only below the ovary; pods (unknown in Mm. cryptogloea, custodis, fernandez-casasii, nitidula) usually numerous, radiating from receptacle in a dense head, each in profile narrowly oblong (6-)8-15 x 3-6 mm, (1-)2-4-seeded, the replum 0.3-0.8 mm wide, the valves when ripe either articulate or valvately dehiscent from apex downward.
Spp. 10, of s.-w. Brazil (Mato Grosso do Sul, w. Parana, far w. Minas Gerais), Paraguay, and n.-e. Argentina.
The nucleus of subser. Brevipedes, consisting ofM. brevipes and sympatric or closely vicariant species that resemble it in virgate stems clothed in crowded, subsessile or shortly petiolate leaves and going out mto an efoUate pseudoraceme, may be visualized as Polycephalae with minute calyx, filaments free to base or almost so, and thintextured corolla-lobes.
The fmits o f M brevipes and M diversipila are craspedial like those of the Polycephalae, but that o f M longiracemosa and perhaps that o f M sceptrum are valvate.
Unfortunately, we lack fmits of the remainder, which, when discovered, may lead to further division of the subseries.
The valvate pod suggests affinity to ser. Dolentes, but the inflorescence is indeterminate like that of other Brevipedes and of all Polycephalae.
It is noteworthy that, just as the Polycephalae have given rise to two species with plumose setae, evidently by way of a merely scabrous stage, so Brevipedes have generated M diversipila, a species that may have either plumose or scabrous setae.
Likewise, just as ecologically specialized Polycephalae have assumed, on Chapada dos Veadeiros, a subacaulescent or short-stemmed life-form, with only few leaves bome below midstem or subradically, so Brevipedes have given rise, in central Paraguay, to M nitidula and M. pseudopetiolaris.
These approximate duplications in indumentum and foliage are here interpreted as examples of parallelism, but no doubt indicate a common evolutionary potential and ultimately a common ancestry for the two groups.
Conspectus of subser. Brevipedes Mimosa * Cauline lvs relatively many and crowded; petioles 0-2 cm.
425. brevipes Bentham 426. diversipila M. Micheli a. var. subglabriseta Bameby b. var, diversipila 427. fernandez-casasii Bameby 428. cryptogloea Bameby 429. sceptrum Bameby 430. custodis Bameby 431. longiracemosa (Burkart) Bameby ** Cauline lvs relatively few, distant, sometimes subradical; petioles 3-8 cm.
432. nitidula Bameby 433. pseudopetiolaris Bameby 433bis. fonticola Bameby, nom. provis.
Key to species of subser. Brevipedes 1.
Lfts of longer pinnae at most 24-jug.; bracts and coroUa-lobes not fimbriolate with thickened hairs.
2.
Plants of Paraguay, s.-w. Brazil, and n.-e. Argentina.
3.
Lf-stks oflower and middle lvs not over 2 cm, often less than 1 cm or reduced to pulvinus.
4.
Setae of stem and If-sks either plumose or toward base strongly scaberulous 426.
M. diversipila (p. 708).
4.
Setae of stem and lf-stks smooth.
5.
Vesture of stems and inflorescence in part of gland-tipped setulae, both hispid and viscid; Sa. de Amambai, Mato Grosso do Sul 428.
M. cryptogloea (p. 711).
5.
Vesture of stems and inflorescence of minute hairs and plain setae, eglandular, sometimes almost none.
6.
Lfts on dorsal face subsymmetrically nerved, the centric midrib and the nerve on each side of it parallel and of subequal strength, all produced to blade apex; corollas thinly retrostrigulose; n.-e. Paraguay and adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil; lfts discontinuously setose-ciliate 427.
M. fernandez-casasii (p. 710).
6.
Lfts on dorsal face asymmetrically nerved, the midrib excentric and the inner posterior nerve stronger than the anterior one (this sometimes lacking); corolla-lobes antrorsely puberulent or glabrous; both sympatric and more widespread.
7.
Lfts oflonger pinnae at once few and large, 7-12-jug. and to 15-26 mm, continuously marginate; capitula without filaments 11-13 mm diam.; corollas 4-5 mm; dehiscence of pod (probably) valvate; local on Sa. de Amambay, Paraguay-Brazil 429.
M. sceptrum (p. 712).
7.
Lfts of longer pinnae at once more numerous and smaller, 10-24-jug. and to 3.5- 11(-12) mm; capitula without filaments 4-9 mm diam.; corollas 1.5-3.6 mm.
8.
Dorsal face of lfts strongly prominulously 4-5-nerved and their margin discontinuously setose-ciliate; peduncles 4-14 mm; calyx minute but perceptible, 0.1- 0.2 mm, the rim erose or minutely ciliolate; corolla 1.5-2.6 mm; pod a craspedium; widespread in Paraguay and in Mato Grosso do Sul and far w. Minas Gerais, Brazil 425.
M. brevipes (p. 707).
8.
Dorsal face of lfts weakly 2-nerved and their margin finely continuously marginate; peduncles 10-30 mm; calyx obsolete; corolla 2.9-3.6 mm; pod unknown; local in depto. Amambay, Paraguay 430.
M. custodis (p. 713).
3.
Lf-stks oflower and middle lvs 3-8 cm; rare spp. of e.-centr. Paraguay.
9.
Lfts of longer pinnae 10-18-jug. and to 6-10 mm 432.
M. nitidula (p. 714).
9.
Lfts of longer pinnae 5-7(-10)-jug. and to 17-26 mm 433.
M. pseudopetiolaris (p. 715).
2.
Plants of s.-e. Minas Gerais and adj. S. Paulo.
10.
Setae of stems loosely deflexed; pinna-rachises mostly 4-10 cm; lfts (3-)4(-5)-nerved dorsally; capitula mostly 2-3 per node of inflorescence; cf M. insidiosa var. major (p. 594).
10.
Setae of stems ascending; pinna-rachises 3-3.5 cm; lfts 1-nerved dorsally 433bis.
M. fonticola (p. 716).
1.
Lfts of longer pinnae 22-45-jug.; bracts and corolla-lobes fimbriolate with small thickened trichomes; Misiones, Argentina 431.
M longiracemosa (p. 713).
425.
Mimosa brevipes Bentham, J. Bot. (Hookstrigose with forwardly subappressed or spreader) 4: 381.
1841.—"Rio Pardo [Mato Grosso ing incurved, yellowish setae to 1.5-7 mm, the do Sul, Riedel, commun.] Langsdorff."
— faces of the firm subconcolorous brown-olivaHolotypus, Riedel 1878/55, K (hb. Benth.)! = ceous, dorsally brown-veined lfts usually thinly NY Neg. 1836, plant at left only; isotypi, Rieappressed-pilose with fine whitish setae, somedel s.n. from Rio Pardo, GH ex LE! Riedel times glabrous, their margin discontinuously and 590, NY! rather weakly setose-ciliate, the dense narrow pseudoracemose inflorescence of soUtary or some M. Z?r^vz>^5 sensu Bentham, 1875:406; 1876: 341 (erpaired, globose capitula rising 0.5-3.5(-4) dm roneously attributed to state of Minas Gerais). ^gy^nd weU-developed foUage.
Stipules firm erect, M. eriophylla sensu Chodat & Hassler, 1904: 551 i""_ ".. * - > -7 ^ r^c r.n/ ix (Hassler 5826, 6791, 6956); non Bentham. lance-attenuate 3-7 x 0.5-0.9(-l) mm, setose M. vernonioides Hassler in sched.,
nom. nud. = Hassler dorsally, glabrous within, tardily deciduous.
Leaf- 11209, G! NY! stalks mostly reduced almost or quite to firm pulvinus, including this only 1-2.5 mm, but in Virgately erect unarmed subshrubs ± 1.5-2 m, some lower cauline lvs at times to 5 mm; pinnae with 1-few simple or distally few-branched stems 1-jug., the rachis of each 2-5.5(-6) cm, the indefoliate and purplish-brown proximally, denseterfoliolar segments (1.2-)1.5-3.5(-4) mm, obly foliate distally, the young branches, back of Iftusely keeled ventrally, scarcely excavated bestks and axes of inflorescence variously hispid or tween successive pulvinules; lfts (10-) 12-24-jug., decrescent only at ends of rachis, the unequal first pair less than 1 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia, the blades subdimidiately cordate or obliquely lanceolate from obtusangulate base, abruptly acuminate-mucronate, those near midrachis 3.5-10(-12) X l^(-7) mm, 2.3-4(-4.2) times as long as wide, all on lower face coarsely 4-5-nerved from pulvinule, the straight or slightly incurved midrib simple or few-branched beyond middle, displaced to divide blade 1:2-3, the inner posterior nerve produced almost to blade apex, the outer posterior ones much shorter, all venation immersed above or only faintly perceptible.
Peduncles 4-11 (-14) mm; capitula either globose or a little longer than wide, without filaments 4-8(-9) mm diam., prior to anthesis either conelike or moriform, the fl-buds either concealed by bracts or surpassed only by their attenuate tips; bracts Unear-attenuate 2.5-3.7 x 0.4 mm, glabrous and keeled dorsally, above middle weakly setose-ciliate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, in some capitula apparently all staminate or functionally so, in others many bisexual; calyx-tube 0.1-0.2 mm, the rim erose or minutely erratically ciliolate, the cilia at most 0.2 mm; corollas accrescent through the capitulum, 1.5-2.6 mm, the ovate cymbiform, not much thickened lobes 0.6-1 x 0.3-0.55 mm, microscopically papillose-puberulent dorsally at apex; filaments pink, free to base or almost so, exserted 4.5-6.5 mm.
Pods of pistillate capitula numerous, sessile, forming a rather dense ball, in profile oblong-elUptic obtuse ±8-10 x 3.5-4 mm, slightly constricted between the (almost always) two seeds, the replum 0.3-0.4 mm wide, the stiffly papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, the distal article separating when ripe both from replum and from the proximal article, dehiscent and free-falling except when caught in tangled setae, the whole pod either comosely setose overall with stramineous tapering setae ± 1.5-2.5 mm or strigose with shorter, forwardly subappressed setae; seeds (few seen) lentiform 2.6-3 x 2.3-2.7 mm, the testa dull brown, fuscous within the pleurogram.
In open cerrado, campo, and at margin of brejo, near 400 m (the elevations seldom recorded), scattered from centr. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil s. to s.-centr. Paraguay (prov. Caazapa) in lat. ±20°-26°S, rarely e. in Brazil to the Triangulo Mineiro (mun. Ituiutaba) at lat. ± 19°S.-n. VVIII, I, the whole sequence not documented.
Mimosa brevipes resembles some members of ser. Polycephalae in virgate, multifoliate and far exserted, sometimes spiciform, efoliate pseudoracemes, but has a minute non-paleaceous calyx and filaments free almost or quite to base.
In habit it resembles some forms ofM dolens sensu lato, which may have similar calyx but differ in the determinate inflorescence.
The species stands as a convenient prototype of its series, a group of microspecies highly diversified on Sa. de Amambay, along the Brazil-Paraguay border, and for short distances to the west and east of this divide.
The species is dismayingly variable in length and density of setae on stems, on back of pinna-rachises, and on pod-valves, in absolute and relative width of leaflets, in length of floral bracts, and in diameter of the capitula.
Specimens from Sa. de Amambay (Hassler 11209, G, NY, distributed as sp. nov., but not described) have loosely setose stems and comosely setose pods, to 12-16 pairs of leaflets to about 2-2.5 mm wide, and capitula without filaments 5.5-7 mm diam. A collection from municipio Sidrolandia in Mato Grosso do SiU (Hatschbach 26056, NY) has, like the type from nearby Rio Pardo, subappressed-setose stem and pod, to 16-24 pairs of leaflets only 1-1.5 mm wide, and moriform capitula only 4-5 mm diam. These extreme types are linked, however, by intermediate forms in which characters of indumentum, leaflets, bracts and capitula vary independently.
Perhaps owing, at least in part, to Bentham's misconception that Riedel's Rio Pardo was in Minas Gerais, and not the river of that name in the present Mato Grosso do Sul that flows into the Parana close to 22°S, M. brevipes has been cloaked in obscurity since its discovery.
Early Paraguayan collections of it were misidentified by Chodat and Hassler either as M. setistipula (Balansa 1462 from VUlarrica, G) or M. eriophylla (Hassler 5826 from rio Carimbatay, G), or thought to represent a new taxon (Hassler 11209 from Sa. de Amambay, cited above under M. vernonioides, nom. nud.).
426.
Mimosa diversipila M. MicheU, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 28(7): 57.
1883.-Typus infra sub var. diversipila indicatur.—M. diversifolia M. MicheU ex B. D. Jacks.,
Index kew.
2: 241 (sphalm.).
1894.
Virgately erect unarmed subshrubs from xylopodium and cluster of woody fusiform roots, including far-exserted, simple or exceptionally few-branched inflorescence (5-)6-l 6(-20) dm tall, the 1-few, equably leafy or basally defoUate stems, lf-stks, lfts and all axes of inflorescence hispidhirsutulous with erect-ascending, commonly arborescently plumulose but sometimes only weakly scaberulous sordid setae, those of stem and If-sks to 0.6-1.8(-3) mm, those of lfts shorter, some often substelliform, the foliage olivaceous subconcolorous, the lfts subequally pubescent on both faces,finelysetose-ciliate but not comeous-marginate, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula maturing in acropetal sequence, the axis of the wholly leafless or (rarely) proximally leafy-bracteate pseudoraceme becoming (1.5-)2-4.5 dm.
Stipules firm erect, lanceolate or Unear-attenuate 3-10 x 0.4-1 mm, densely pubescent dorsally like stem, glabrous 3-5-nerved within, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including obese pulvinus mostly 1.5-7(-9) mm, or of some upper lvs reduced to pulvinus; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (2.5-)3-7(-8) cm, the interfoliolar segments (2.5-)3-8(-9) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (10-)11- 21(-23)-jug., gently decrescent toward each end of rachis, the often unequal first pair 0.5-2 mm distant from lance-subulate paraphyllidia 0.6- 2.3 mm, the blades obliquely oblongor ovateelliptic from shallowly semicordate base, abruptly apiculate, those near mid-rachis (6-)7.5-17 x 2.5-6 mm, 2.3-3.2 times as long as wide, all veinless or almost so above, beneath (2-)3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2-3, the inner posterior nerve incurved-ascending beyond mid-blade, there either expiring or obscurely brochidodrome, the outer nerve much shorter, the secondary venulation scarcely or not perceptible.
Peduncles solitary and 2-3-nate, 4-16 mm, usually densely pUose; capitula without filaments (5-)5.5-7.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the receptacle setose; bracts narrowly elliptic or oblance-attenuate 1.6-2.4 x 0.35-0.45 mm, toward apex finely minutely setulose-puberulent with hairs not over 0.5 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate and often broader and shorter than the bisexual ones; calyx a membranous rim ±0.1 mm; corollas at and above midcapitiUum narrowly vase-shaped 2.1-3.2 mm, the narrowly elliptic-cymbiform firm, internally pinkish, extemally sublustrous lobes 0.8-1.1 x 0.4-0.45 mm, a little thickened and, except for prominulous keel, minutely puberulent near apex; fUaments pink, monadelphous through ±0.5 mm around base of glabrous ovary, exserted 5-7 mm.
Pods commonly many per capitulum, radiating in a cluster but not forming a dense hard ball like those ofM. dolens, each in profile narrowly oblong or (when short) oblong-obovate, obtuse or mucronulate, 6-12 x ±3 mm, 2—4-seeded, the replum 0.5-0.8 mm wide, densely crinite with multiseriate erect tapering, either scaberulous or smooth setae ±1.5-2.5 mm, when ripe splitting at apex to release the biconvex, free-falling indehiscent articles, these 3-4 mm long, densely setose like replum; seeds plump but marginally subcompressed, 2.7-3.5 x 2.2 mm, the smooth testa fawn or fuscous, dull.
Mimosa diversipila is poised morphologically between two extensive complexes, that ofM. dolens, for the most part similar in subobsolete calyx but dissimilar in the precocious terminal capitulum, and that ofM radula, which has the same acropetally developing pseudoraceme but paleaceous calyx.
Much has been made in the past of the indumentum ofM diversipila, which (in the typical form) consists, at least on stem and leaf-stalk, of plumose setae which become shorter on the leaflet-faces, sometimes compressed almost into stellae.
Micheli originally described M diversipila as a member of ser. Lepidotae, and while Burkart (1948: 182) recognized its genetic relationship to the group known as Meticulosae (sensu lato), he persisted (1964: 378), with reservations, in giving it a place in his revision of ser. Lepidotae.
This arrangement can no longer pass muster, especially now that we are acquainted on the one hand with M thermarum and M lanuginosa, unquestionably akin to M radula sensu lato (some forms of which have scabrous setae), and on the other with the habitally similar and sympatric group of microspecies of which M brevipes was the first described.
To these M diversipila is firmly linked by its Argentine var. subglabriseta, described herein, in which the whole plant form is that of typical M diversipila except that the cauline setae are not plumose but merely scaberulous at base and essentially smooth distally.
Plumose setae have made several independent appearances in Mimosa—see for examples haplostemonous M pseudolepidota and diplostemonous M surumuensis—and become significant indicators of affinity only when coordinated with supporting characters.
Burkart (1948, I.e.) remarked that the bristles of most Argentine plants referred to M diversipila are not really plumose, but only scaberulous. and he identified a similar plant, in which the setae are all essentially smooth or almost so as the distinct species M setistipula Bentham.
Genuine M setistipula, while morphologically similar to M diversipila in leaf-formula and often in the minute calyx, is a frutescent mimosa of highland central Minas Gerais, different not only in habit and ecology but also in the hysteranthously foliate pseudoraceme, longer peduncles (15-30, not 4-16 mm), and pod nearly twice as wide.
Its probable relationship is not with the campo-dwelling Brevipedes but with M pogocephala and allied species of Sa. do Espinha^o.
Key to varieties of M. diversipila 1.
Setae of stems minutely scaberulous toward base, those of Ift-faces smooth; s. Misiones and Corrientes in Argentina 426a. var. subglabriseta (p. 710).
1.
Setae of stems plumose to or beyond middle, those of Ift-faces similarly branched but often with shorter shaft, becoming substellate; Paraguay s.-ward from rio Apa, barely crossing rio Paraguai into adj. Formosa, Argentina, and passing the crest of Sa. de Amambai just into adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil 426b. var. diversipila (p. 710).
426a. Mimosa diversipila M. Micheli var. subglabriseta Bameby & Fortunato, var. nov., a var. diversipila setis caulinis parce brevissime scaberulis nec plumosis, foliolomm laevibus nec substellatis absimilis.—Argentina.
Misiones: Depto.
Capital, Arroyo Itaembe, 17.1.1966 (fl, frjun), A. Krapovickas (with C. L. Cristobal) 12094.—Yiolotypus, US; isotypus, CTES.
A. setistipula sensu Burkart, 1948: 189, fig. 33S; non Bentham.
Pubescence as described in key to varieties.
In campo, sometimes at edge of thickets or in low-lying places, mostly below 300 m, apparently replacing var. diversipila in n.-e. Argentina (Misiones and Corrientes).—Fl.
XII-II(-?).
The var. subglabriseta was collected somewhere in Corrientes by Aime Bonpland (s.n.,
P), many years before Balansa discovered the typical variety in Paraguay.
426b. Mimosa diversipila M. Micheli var. diversipila.
M diversipila M. Micheli, 1883, I.e., t. 22 (pulchra!), sens, str.—"[Paraguay] Mbocaiati prope Villa Rica in pratis, [Balansa] 1463; Paraguari, n. 1830 (foliolis parvis)."
- Lectotypus, Balansa 1463, G!; isotypus, P!; syntypi, Balansa 1830, G! P! M. diversipila sensu Burkart, 1948: 179 (antecedent bibliography), fig. 3ID (max. ex parte), 1964: 378.
Pubescence as described in key to varieties.
In campo and open thickets, ±150-400 m, locally common in e. Paraguay s.-ward from rio Apa and e. of rio Paraguai, but extending just w. of the latter into extreme e. Formosa, Argentina, and on Sa. de Amambai passing just e. into s. Mato Grosso do Sul, BrazU.-Fl.
XI-II. 427.
Mimosa fernandez-casasii Bameby & Fortunato, sp. nov., inter Brevipedes confertim multiet sessilifolias foliolis dorso nervis exilibus 3-4 parallelis et aequilongis instmctis necnon flosculis retro-strigulosis praestans; habitu virgato elato, foliis confertis subsessilibus cito reversis, inflorescentia elongata post anthesin foliata M xanthocentrae subsp. tremulam referens, sed ab ea foliolomm venatione, calyce minuto nudo vel brevissime ciliolato (nec pappiformi) coroUaeque pube retrorsa valde diversa.—Paraguay.
Canendiyu: unos 35 km al sur de Catuete, 17.
XII.1982 (fl jun), /.
Fernandez Casas (with W. Hahn & A. Schinini) 76^2.—Holotypus, NY; isotypus, MO.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso do Sul: Porto Frangeli, mun. MundoNovo, 10.
Xn.l982(fljun), G.7/fl^5c/zbach 45552.—Paratypus, NY.
Virgately erect unarmed subshrubs 1.5-2 m tall with deeply canaliculate, densely foliate stems 4- 5 mm diam. near base of inflorescence (lower parts not seen), these like all Ifand inflorescenceaxes hispid-pilose with weak tapering or flagellum-tipped glabrous setae to 2-2.5 mm mixed with minute pubemlence, the thin-textured oUvaceous concolorous lfts thinly finely viUosulous on both faces, slenderly discontinuously setoseciliate, the multicapitate, hysteranthously foliate pseudoraceme of ellipsoid capitula at early anthesis 2-3 dm long, not seen either in late anthesis or in fmit.
Stipules incurved-ascending 5- 10 X 0.2-0.3 mm, obscurely 1-nerved, densely setose dorsaUy, persistent.
Leaf-stalks subobsolete, including pulvinus 1-2 mm, densely setose; spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 5-6 cm (perhaps longer in lower cauline lvs, these not seen), the interfoUolar segments 1.5-3 mm; lfts of Ionger pinnae 20-24-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.5-0.9 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.7-1.3 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from semicordate base, abmptly acuminulate at apex, the longer ones 8- 9 X 1.8-2.4 mm, 3.6-4.4 times as long as wide, all smooth above, beneath finely 5-7-nerved from pulvinule, the simple midrib only slightly excentric, one anterior and 1-2 posterior primary nerves produced nearly to blade apex, 1-2 outer posterior ones shorter, the slender, widely ascending cilia ±1-2 mm.
Peduncles solitary 1.5- 2.5 cm; capitula without filaments 10-12 x 7- 8 mm, prior to anthesis conelike, the fl-buds concealed by imbricate silky-setose bracts, these Unear-attenuate 4-4.5 X 0.2 mm;^ow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx membranous campanulate 0.2-0.3 mm, the rim minutely denticulate, either naked or ciliolate with setulae not over 0.2 mm; corolla narrowly funnelform 2.4-2.7 mm, the angulately 4-ribbed tube glabrous, the membranous ovate, shallowly cymbiform 1-nerved lobes 0.5-0.7 x 0.5 mm, retro-hispidulous dorsally; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 5.5-7 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous; pod unknown.
In wet campo and on roadsides in cerrado, at elevations not recorded, known only from e.- centr. Paraguay (depto. Canendiyu) and adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil (Mundo Novo).—Fl.
XIIThis poorly known mimosa resembles some ofthe coarser unarmed forms ofM xanthocentra in virgate habit, downswept leaves, thin-textured leaflets, and long, hysteranthously foliate pseudoraceme, but it differs in venation ofthe leaflets, in minute (not pappiform) calyx, and in retrorsely pilosulous corolla-lobes.
The parallel venation of the leaflets sets it well apart from the habitally similar and sympatric M brevipes, and the smooth setae from M diversipila.
The leafletvenation is oddly reminiscent of sect. Habbasia, and is unique in sect. Mimosa.
The tme aflinity ofM.fernandez-casasii may become clearer when the fmit is found, but for the present the species seems to fit more easily into subser. Brevipedes than elsewhere in ser. Mimosa.
428.
Mimosa cryptogloea Bameby, sp. nov., habitu virgato, inflorescentia indeterminata acropetalim maturescenti efoliata, calyce minuto, filamentisque inter se liberis cum ser. Brevipedibus omnino congruens, sed ab iis omnibus indumento e setis longioribus simplicibus et brevissimis capitato-glandulosis immixtis constanti diversa; ulterius a M sceptro foliolis 14-18 (nec 8-12)-jugis usque ±3.5-4 (nec 4.5-8) mm usque latis, capitulisque minoribus ±9 (nec 11-13) mm diam., ulterius et facilius a M fernandez-casasii petiolis medium caulem versus ±1.5-2 cm longis (nec obsoletis), foliolis majoribus ±15 (nec 9) mm usque longis e pulvinulo 3 (nec-5-7)-nerviis, pedunculis elongatis ±4 (nec 1.5-2.5) cm longis, necnon coroUis majusculis (iis M sceptri propius similibus) ±4.5 (nec 2.4-2.7) mm longis diversa.—Brazil.
Mato Grosso do Sul: Ponto Alto, mun. Ponta Pora, 12.11.1983 (fl jun), G. Hatschbach 46147.—Holotypus, MBM 80420; isotypus, NY.
Coarse, virgately erect unarmed subshrubs attaining 18 dm, with striate simple, densely foliate stems to 7 mm diam. passing upward into a long multicapitulate efoliate pseudoraceme of globose capitula, the stem, lf-axes and inflorescence at once hispid with tapering plain setae to 2-3 mm and viscid-villosulous with short gray pubemlence and tiny but crowded gland-tipped setulae to 0.2 mm, the gray-olivaceous concolorous lfts densely strigose-setose on both faces, thinly continuously pallid-marginate, the amply stipulate pseudoraceme rising to 5 dm above the uppermost developed If.
Stipules linear-attenuate 8- 16 X ± 1 mm, densely pubemlent on both faces, dorsally setose and pectinately setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of lvs near mid-stem ±1.5- 2 cm X 0.7-1 mm, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 5.5-8.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 4-5 mm; lfts 14-18-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the unequal first pair 0.3-0.6 mm distant from Unear-attenuate paraphyllidia 3-5 mm, all in outline lance-oblong from obtusangulate base, abmptly acuminulate and mucronulate, those at mid-rachis ±14-16 x 3.5-4 mm, four times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath slenderly 3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib moderately displaced, the inner posterior nerve expiring below mid-blade, the outer one short or obscure.
Peduncles soUtary ±4 cm; capitula without filaments ±9 mm diam., prior to anthesis densely silky-hispid with emergent bracteal setae; bracts narrowly linear-oblanceolate ±4 X 0.2 mm, beyond middle silky-setose dorsally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx campanulate 0.2 mm, minutely denticulate, glabrous; corolla subcylindric 4.5 mm glabrous, the ovate membranous 1-nervedlobes 1.2 x 0.6 mm; filaments lilac-pink, free almost to base, exserted ± 10 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous; pod unknown.
In campo at edge of shrub-thickets, near 650 m, known only from the Brazilian slope of Sa. do Amambai in mun. Ponta Pora, Mato Grosso do Sul, BrazU.-n. II-III(-?).
The indumentum o f M cryptogloea is unique in subser. Brevipedes by an undercoat of short secretory setulae largely concealed by pubemlence and long plain setae, but evident under magnification.
The plant is otherwise very like the compatriot M sceptrum, which has similarly long corollas but leaflets at once fewer and larger, and M custodis, which has leaflets of about the same number but smaller and only two-, not three-nerved, in addition to substantially smaller flowers.
An insufficiency of collections and lack of mature fmits are at present insuperable obstacles to rational assessment of these differences.
429.
Mimosa sceptrum Bameby, sp. nov., M brevipedi habitu virgato, calyce minimo aliisque notulis plurimis accedens, sed ab ea pinnamm longiomm foliolis 7-12 (nec 10-24)- jugis magnis 15-26 (nec 3.5-12) mm usque longis, nervo marginali tenui continuo circumdatis, capituUs magnis absque filamentis 11- 13 (nec 4-9) mm diametientibus, coroUis 4-5 (nec 1.5-2.6) mm longis, necnon legumine (vix autem noto) ut videtur valvatim dehiscenti (nec craspedio) diversa.—Paraguay.
Amambay: in alta planitie et declivibus Sierra de Amambay, 1.1908 (fl), T. Rojas in Hassler 10086.-Holotypus, G; isotypi, A (3 sheets), NY.—Ibid.,
1.1908 (fr), T. Rojas in Hassler 10086a.- Paratypi, A, G. Robust unarmed, virgately erect subshrubs 10- 14(-?) dm tall with simple stem densely amply foliate to middle or beyond and passing into a long efoliate pseudoraceme of solitary globose capitula maturing in acropetal sequence, the stem and all axes of lvs and inflorescence hispid or when young silky-hispid with spreading-ascending yellowish smooth setae ±0.7-1.4 mm, the brownish-olivaceous subconcolorous lfts loosely strigulose on both faces with fine, antrorsely subappressed setae not more than 0.1 mm diam. at dilated base, the slender, continuously pallid margin ciliate with pluriseriate setae.
Stipules erect firm, lanceolate or lance-attenuate (3-)4-9 X 0.5-1.4 mm, dorsally hispid like stem, glabrous within, becoming dry but persistent.
Leafstalks including grossly dilated but hard pulvinus 3-9 X 0.6-1 mm, widely shaUowly grooved ventrally (spicule 0); pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (3- )3.5-8.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 4- 8 mm; lfts (7-)8-l2-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 1-1.5 mm distant from lance-subulate, often unequal paraphyllidia 1- 2.2 mm, the blades broadly lance-oblong from semicordate base, abmptly acuminate, those near mid-rachis 15-26 x 4.5-8 mm, 2.8-3.5 timesas long as wide, all veinless above or almost so, beneath 3-nerved from pulvinule, the slenderly prominulous midrib dividing blade ±1:2, the inner posterior nerve expiring near mid-blade, the outer one very short.
Peduncles 10-25(-28) mm; capitula without filaments 11-13 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike, densely sUky-setose; bracts linear-oblance-attenuate (3-)3.5-5 x 0.4-0.6 mm, proximally embracing the subtended fl, beyond middle silky-barbate dorsally; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, apparently all bisexual; calyx a minute collar or obsolete; corolla narrowly vase-shaped or subtubular 4-5 mm, the membranous ovate, faintly 1-nerved lobes 0.9-1.2 mm, minutely pubemlent at tip; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 7.5-10 mm.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) packed into a dense hard sphere 18- 22 mm diam., sessile, in profile obliquely obovate ±8-9 X 4 mm, broadly cuneate at base, at apex excentrically mucronulate by the stylebase, the slender sutures ±0.4 mm wide, not constricted between the two seeds, the firmly papery valves densely barbate overall with ascending pallid setae to ±2 mm; dehiscence not seen, perhaps valvate as in M dolens; seeds unknown.
In wet campo and on roadsides, near 500 (?) m, localized on both slopes of Sa. de Amambay in Paraguay and adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, BrazU.-R. XII-I. Mimosa sceptrum resembles M brevipes and M custodis in virgate growth-form, indeterminate pseudoraceme of capitula, and minute calyx, but differs from both in fewer larger leaflets and fatter capitula of larger flowers; and is further distinguished from M brevipes in the seemingly valvate dehiscence of the pod and in the continuous marginal nerve of the less prominently nerved leaflets.
These species all occur in close proximity on Sa. de Amambay, and M sceptrum may perhaps have arisen through introgression between M brevipes or M custodis and some sympatric form of M dolens, which could have contributed the genes for valvately dehiscent fruits bome in a dense sphere, but which is consistently distinguished from M brevipes and its allies by the determinate pseudoraceme.
430.
Mimosa custodis Bameby, sp. nov., proxime M brevipedi affinis sed foliolis dorso debiliter 2-, nec forte 4-5-nerviis margine pallido continuo cinctis, pedunculis 10-30 (nec 4-14) mm longis, calyce nuUo, coroUisque 2.9-3.6 (nec 1.5-2.6) mm longis diversa.—Paraguay.
Amambay: in altiplanitie 'Sierra de Amambay,' II. 1913 (fl), T. Rojas in Hassler 10961.- Holotypus, G; isotypi.
A, NY.
M. conferta var. guaranitica fma parvifolia Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 552 (=P1. hassler.
408).
1904.—"[Paraguay.
Amambay:] in campis siccis in regione cursus superioris fluminis Apa, Jan. [Hassler] n. 8326."-Holotypus, G!; isotypi, A! NY! Virgate subshrubs attaining 1 m and more, closely akin to and habitally resembling M brevipes, with eventually defoliate slender tmnk and densely multifoliate homotinous stems passing upward into a simple virgate pseudoraceme 1-4 dm of small solitary globose capitula, the stems and all Ifand inflorescence-axes densely hispid with smooth yellowish setae to ±1.5-2.5 mm, the subconcolorous lfts loosely strigose-hispidulous on both faces, slenderly but continuously palUd-marginate.
Stipules erect linear-lanceolate 3-8 X 0.4-0.7 mm, hispid dorsally, glabrous within, long persistent.
Leaf-stalks 1.5-3.5 mm, reduced or almost so to hard livid, densely setose pulvinus, the lvs appearing almost sessile against stem; pinnae 1-jug., the recurved or deflexed rachises 2-6 cm, progressively shorter upward along stem, the interfoliolar segments ± 1.4-4 mm; lfts 11-17-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair less than 1 mm distant from smaU subulate paraphyllidia concealed in setae, the blades oblong-eUiptic from broadly semicordate base, abmptly acuminulate or mucronate, those near mid-rachis 7-11 x 3-4.5 mm, 1.9- 3.1 times as long as wide, aU veinless above, beneath 2-nerved from pulvinule, the slender simple, moderately displaced midrib attenuate or immersed distally, the posterior nerve expiring near or below mid-blade, the marginal nerve 0.1-0.2 mm wide, the pluriseriate cilia ascending.
Peduncles 1-3 cm; capitula without filaments 7-9 mm diam., the minutely pubemlent fl-buds concealed prior to anthesis by bracteal setae; receptacle setose; bracts oblance-acuminate 2.4-3.6 x 0.5-0.7 mm, in lower half embracing the fl, the tip either glabrous or setose dorsally, 1-nerved, hispid-ciliate; y/ovv^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, all or most bisexual; calyx obsolete; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.9-3.6 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave lobes 0.7-1 x 0.6- 0.8 mm, a little thickened and weakly 1-nerved distally; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 5.5- 7 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, subsessile; ovules (? always) 2; pod unknown.
In dry campo, elevation not recorded, but to be expected at ±400-600 m; known only from the w. slope of Sa. de Amambay near 22-23°S in depto. Amambay, Paraguay.—Fl.
XII-II. Mimosa custodis is manifestly akin to M brevipes, but differs in weakly 2-nerved, not prominently 4-5-nerved leaflets, in generally longer peduncles (10-30, not 4-14 mm), in obsolete calyx, and substantially longer flowers (2.9-3.6, not 1.5- 2.6 mm).
It is named in honor of Teodoro Rojas (1877-1954), keeper of Emile Hassler's herbarium in Asunci6n, who collected for the first time many of the remarkable endemic plants of Amambay province.
431.
Mimosa longiracemosa (Burkart) Bameby, stat. nov. M callosa var. longiracemosa Burkart, Darwiniana 8: 192, figs. 34, 35.
1948.- "Argentina, Misiones: Santa Ana, en campos, F. M Rodriguez 626, en flor, noviembre de 1912.
.
.
Del mismo lugar y coleccionista, ano 1913, en fmct.. . ."—Syntypi, SI, not seen; isosyntypi, F(2 sheets)! = FNeg.
57327, 57328.
Unarmed subshrub with few, stiffly erect simple virgate stems, including the terminal pluricapitulate efoliate pseudoraceme 7-11 dm, the brown striate stems and lf-axes distantly hispidulous with ascending setae 0.5-1.5 mm, neither pubemlent nor glandular, the small coriaceous, continuously callous-marginate and subappressed-setose-ciliate lfts either glabrous on both faces or thinly strigulose above, the globose capitula soUtary, subtended by a pair of stipules and the mdiment of a If.
Stipules firm erect, narrowly lance-attenuate or setiform 3.5-6 x 0.4- 0.6 mm, 1-4-nerved, the margin randomly ciliate or glabrous.
Leaf-stalks 20-40 x 0.5 mm, comeously dilated at each end, narrowly sulcate ventrally, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of those near mid-stem 5-7 cm, of some lower ones to 13 cm, the interfoliolar segments 2-3.5 mm; lfts 22-40(-45)-jug., scarcely graduated, the first pair ± 1 mm distant from lance-subulate paraphyllidia 0.7-1.2 mm, the blades obliquely lanceor ovate-elliptic or semi-ovate from semicordate base, sharply mucronate-apiculate, the larger ones 5-9 X 1.4-3 mm, 2.6-3.5 times as long as wide, all (2-)3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2-3, weakly pinnatebranched, the posterior nerve expiring near or below mid-blade, the pallid marginal nerve 0.1- 0.15 mm wide, the cilia free for 0.2-0.4 mm.
Peduncles 2—4(-5) cm; capitula without filaments 7-8.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the bracts nearly as long as and incurved over the obtuse, bluntly 4-keeled fl-buds; bracts oblanceolate, incurved beyond middle through 90°, the margin and blade beyond middle fimbriolate with minute thickened trichomes; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx a minute collar 0.1 mm or less; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 3.2-3.7 mm, the 4-nerved membranous tube glabrous, the ovate, concave but not thickened lobes ±0.7 X 0.5 mm, extemally and marginally fimbriolate like the bracts; filaments pink, united into a stemonozone ±0.2 mm, exserted ±7 mm.
Pods numerous in dense spherical, scarcely compressible clusters, sessile, in profile narrowly obovate-elliptic, abmptly apiculate, 10-15 x 5-6 mm, 2-4-seeded, the replum less than 1 mm wide, the stiffly papery valves and the replum alike hispid with forwardly ascending tapering setae to 3.5-8 mm, the valves dehiscent in one piece from apex downward; ripe seeds not seen.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be expected in seasonaUy moist campo, known only from the type-locaUty in the lower Parana valley near Sta. Ana, Misiones, Argentina, to be sought in adjacent Paraguay.—Fl.
IX-X(-?).
Mimosa longiracemosa was subordinated by Burkart to M callosa.
The resemblance in foliage is strong, but the inflorescence of M longiracemosa lacks the terminal precociously flowering capitulum ofM callosa, consisting rather of about 15-30 capitula that flower by acropetal stages of a few at a time.
The flowers of M callosa are pubemlent at apex and are subtended by setoseciliate bracts, whereas the flowers of M longiracemosa are papillate-fimbriolate with small thickened trichomes and subtended by strongly incurved bracts similarly fimbriolate and bereft of setae.
For lack of evidence the specific status and affinities of M longiracemosa within the genus cannot be considered settled.
It appears poised morphologically between subser. Dolentes and subser. Brevipedes, having the fmiting characters of the former but the inflorescence of the latter.
It is here provisionally referred to subser. Brevipedes by arbitrary emphasis on the indeterminate mode of the long efoliate pseudoraceme.
432.
Mimosa nitidula Bameby, sp. nov., inflorescentia pseudoracemosa indeterminata virgatim elongata efoliata, calyce minimo, filamentisque inter se liberis inter ser. Brevipedes coUocanda, foliomm majomm petiolo evoluto 4.5-7.5 cm longo pinnis suis subaequilongo M. pseudopetiolari ut videtur proxima, ab hac autem foliolis subduplo magis numerosis dimidioque minoribus 10-18- (nec 5-10-)jugis, 6- 10 (nec 17-26) mm usque longis diversa.— Paraguay: sine loc, sed e coUectoris numero verisimiliter in departamenti Cordillera viciniis pagi Tobati lecta, E. Hassler 6265.— Holotypus, G. Slender unarmed subshrubs with wandlike ribbed castaneous stems, including the simple virgate pseudoraceme of small globose capitula to ±12 dm tall, sparsely hispid with scattered spreading-ascending setae 0.5-1.5 mm, the brown-glaucescent concolorous lfts glabrous lustrous on both faces, continuously caUous-marginate and finely setose-ciliolate, the inflorescence developing in regular acropetal sequence.
Stipules firm ascending, lance-attenuate 4-7 x 0.4-0.9 mm, glabrous 3-nerved dorsally, weakly setose-ciliolate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks narrowly ascending 4.5-7.5 cm, at middle 0.4-0.5 mm diam., the ventral groove open and very shaUow, spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 4-7.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 4-5.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 10-18 (of some proximal lvs only 5-8, no fiirther described)-jug., scarcely graduated, the first pair 3-4.5 mm distant from erect subulate paraphyllidia 0.8-1.2 mm, the blades obliquely ovate from broadly semicordate base, abmptly mucronate, the larger ones 6-10 x 2.6-4.5 mm, ±2.2 times as long as wide, all veinless or almost so above, beneath 3-4-nerved from pulvinule, the gently incurved midrib displaced to divide blade ± 1:2, distally 1-2-branched, the inner posterior nerve brochidodrome beyond mid-blade, the pallid marginal nerve ±0.1 mm diam., the scattered 1-seriate cilia free for 0.2-0.7 mm.
Peduncles solitary 8-18 mm; capitula without filaments 7.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the 4-angulate fl-buds obtuse, granular at tip; bracts narrowly oblong, abmptly incurved and distally acuminate ±2 x 0.6 mm, 1-nerved, glabrous dorsally, the distal margins with minute thickened trichomes; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx obsolete or almost so; corolla narrowly vase-shaped ±3.5 mm, the ovate incurved, scarcely thickened but dorsally carinate lobes ± 1.1 X 0.9 mm, charged near margin with minute thickened trichomes; filaments (probably pink) free to base, exserted 6.5 mm; ovary minutely ciliolate dorsally; pod unknown.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be sought in treeless campo, known only from the type-collection, surmised to originate in department of Cordillera, Paraguay.-Fl.
XII(-?).
This and the next following differ from other Brevipedes in their relatively few, distant and longpetiolate leaves.
They may be misplaced in the subseries, but I can find no more appropriate affiliation in ser. Mimosa.
Specific characters of M. nitidula in this setting are the wandlike growthhabit and relatively numerous and small, lustrous leaflets which forcefully recall those of the microphyllidious varieties ofM dolens found in southeastem Paraguay, one of which may have played a part in its genesis.
It is known at present from the one collection cited, the origin of which is not precisely recorded.
433.
Mimosa pseudopetiolaris Bameby, sp. nov., olim cum M oligophylla, serius cum.
M petiolari controversa, a prima foliomm petiolo espiculato, foliolis cujusque pinnae simul paucis 5-10- (nec 28-45)-jugis ac majusculis 17- 25 (nec 6-13) mm usque longis manifeste diversa, a secunda foliolomm numero ac magnitudine, calyce minuto ±0.2 mm longo vix ciliolato (nec paleaceo-pappiformi 1.5-2 mm longo), filamentis inter se liberis (nec per 1.5- 2 mm monadelphis), necnon leguminis valvulis comoso-setosis (nec strigosis) absimiUima.—Paraguay.
Cerro Peron pres de Paraguari, dans les lieux herbeux, 20.
XI.1876, B. Balansa 7^65.—Holotypus, G (3 sheets); isotypi, K, P = NY Neg. 11816.
M. oligophylla M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 28(7): 56.
1883, ex parte (Balansa 1465), exclus. lectotypo.
M. meticulosa var. petiolaris fma genuina sensu Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 549 (=P1. hassler.
405).
1904; non M. petiolaris Bentham.
Unarmed, functionally herbaceous, macrophyllidious subshrubs from woody root 1.5-2 cm diam. and a short caudex, including efoliate inflorescence 3.5-5.5 dm tall, the slender erect flowering stems bearing 2-A developed lvs mostly subradical or below mid-stem, thence passing into a lax pseudoraceme of globose capitula, the stems, lf-axes and peduncles all strigose with straight, forwardly appressed tapering setae to 1.5-2.5 mm and often in addition minutely pubemlent, the foliage brown-olivaceous subconcolorous, the firmly chartaceous plane lfts continuously callous-marginate and appressedsetose-ciliolate, glabrous on both faces to finely pubemlent on both faces or only beneath, rarely also thinly strigose-setose beneath.
Stipules erect, lanceolate or triangular-lanceolate 3-7 x 1-2 mm, coarsely 3-9-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of radical and subradical lvs 3-8 cm x 0.7-1.1 mm, of rare upper cauline lvs as short as 1 cm (no further described), all widely shallowly sulcate ventrally; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (2-)3-6.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 6-13 mm; lfts 5-7(-10)-jug., a little accrescent distally, the first pair 2-5 mm distant from linear-elliptic 1-nerved paraphyllidia 1.2-3 mm, the blades asymmetrically oblong-eUiptic from widely semicordate base, obtuse but minutely deltateapiculate, the larger ones 17-26 x 6.5-11.5 mm, ±2.3-2.7 times as long as wide, all (4-)5-nerved from pulvinule, the straight midrib dividing blade ±1:2-2.3, l-2(-3)-branched distally on either side, the inner posterior nerve brochidodrome well beyond mid-blade, the rest shorter and weaker, a faint tertiary venulation sometimes just perceptible, the primary venation coarsely prominulous beneath, less so above.
Peduncles 1- 3.5 cm; capitula (maturing in acropetal sequence) without filaments 6-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but hispidulous; bracts lanceolate 1.5-2.5 X 0.5-0.8 mm, minutely pubemlent and 1-nerved dorsally, setose-ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, apparently all bisexual; calyx 0.15-0.2 mm, obscurely lobulate, the orifice with a few random pallid setulae 0.2-0.3 mm; corolla 2.1-2.5 mm, narrowly vase-shaped, the ovate concave, dorsally carinate and pubemlent, scarcely thickened lobes 0.9-1.1 x 0.5 mm; filaments presumably pink, free to base, exserted 5-7 mm.
Pods of well-fertilized capitula 20 or more, radiating from receptacle, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong 9-15 x 3.5-4 mm, (2-)3-4- seeded, the replum 0.3-0.5 mm wide, densely hispid overall with straight ascending stramineous setae to 1.5-2 mm, the papery valves similarly comose-hispid with erect but distally recurving setae, breaking up when ripe into freefalling biconvex indehiscent articles 3-4 mm long; seeds (1 seen) biconvexly obovoid ± 3 x 2 mm, the testa smooth brown sublustrous.
In grassy places at low elevations, known only from the type-locality at Cerro Per6n near Paraguari, centr. Paraguay.—Fl.
X-XII(-?).
The type-collection ofM pseudopetiolaris was strangely referred by Micheli to his own M oligophylla, from which it differs fundamentally in leaf-formula, leaflet-size, and espiculate leafstalks; and was later equated by Chodat & Hassler with the rare Brazilian planaltine M. petiolaris, again quite different in leaf-formula and further so in the paleaceous calyx and monadelphous filaments of subser. Polycephalae.
Its presumed affinity is mentioned under the preceding.
433bis.
Mimosa fonticola Bameby, nom. provis.—Brazil.
Sao Paulo: source du rio Parahyba, 7.1.1876 (fl jun), A. Glaziou ("avec le Prince et le comte de Barral") 8432, P.—M dolens sensu Glaziou, 1906: 178, ex parte, non Vellozo.
Erect virgate subshrubs of unknown height (6 + dm), unarmed eglandular, the terete striate, densely leafy stems, lf-stks and peduncles densely viUosulous and hispid with mixed short gray hairs and spreading-ascending mfous setae to 1-2 mm, the foliage bicolored, the firm lfts when dry dull brown above, leaden-gray beneath, loosely strigose on both faces, finely continuously callousmarginate and ascending-setose-ciliate, the inflorescence a simple efoliate indeterminate pseudoraceme of solitary globose capitula exserted to 2(-?) dm beyond foliage.
Stipules firm ascending, narrowly lanceolate ±5-7 x 0.5 mm (lower lvs unknown); pinnae 1-jug., the rachis ±3.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1.5-3 mm; lfts 12-15-jug., the smaU first pair close to subulate paraphyllidia ±1.5 mm, thence scarcely graduated, the blades oblong-eUiptic from semicordate base, abmptly acumimUate, those at midrachis 8-10.5 X 2.7-3.3 mm, ± 3 times as long as wide, the marginal nerve ±0.1 mm thick, the ascending cilia mostly less than 1 mm, the blades all nerveless above, faintly 1 -nerved beneath by the slightly displaced midrib.
Peduncles at anthesis 3-8 mm; capitula without filaments ±9 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike, the glabrous fl-buds concealed by imbricate oblanceelliptic hispid-ciliate bracts ±4 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx obsolete; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 3.3 mm, the ovate concave, scarcely thickened lobes ±0.7 x 0.5 mm, 1 -nerved dorsally, glabrous; filaments (probably pink) free to base, exserted 4.5 mm; ovary before fertilization glabrous; pod unknown.
In unrecorded habitat, known only from the above-cited locality in upland e. S. Paulo.-Fl.
The plant provisionally described as M fonticola is in the earliest stage of anthesis and insufficient as a basis for formal description.
It was mistaken by Glaziou for M dolens, but is unarmed and eglandular, and has a long, apparently indeterminate virgate inflorescence of a type usually associated with a craspedially dehiscent fmit.
Its characters are given here in detail in order to draw attention of Brazilian botanists to the existence of an undescribed mimosa in need of study in the field.
It bears a strong likeness in most characters to the Paraguayan M custodis, but has developed leaf-stalks, one-nerved leaflets, and very short peduncles.
Mimosa dolens var. latifolia is also similar except in the determinate inflorescence.
E(ii.26).
Series MIMOSA subseries T H O M I S T A E Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Thomistae Bameby, subser. nov. monotypica affinitatis incertae, habitu foUoUsque majusculis coriaceis glabris reticulato-venulosis eximie marginatis M dolentis quamdam varietatem inermem referens, sed imprimis capituUs 2-3-nis (nec solitariis) seriatim acropetaliter maturescentibus (terminaU haud inter omnes maximo et praecoci), leguminisque valvulis maturis articulatis (nec valvatim hiantibus) diversissima, notulis plurimis cum subserie Brevipedibus congma sed inter eas foliolis venosissimis et calyce pappiformi anomala.
Suffrutex virgata 2 m usque macrophyllidia, inflorescentia pseudoracemosa elongata aphylla; foliomm formula i/5-8, foliolis majoribus 33- 40 X 13-21 mm; calyx paleaceo-pappiformis 2.5-3 mm longus; corolla glabra; craspedium plerumque 3-4-spermum. —Sp. unica: M. thomista Bameby.
Macrophyllidious unarmed virgate subshrubs attaining 2 m, the axes of the efoliate pseudoraceme of globose capitula retrostrigulose; leafformula i/5-8, the coriaceous lfts reticulately venulose, coarsely marginate, the larger ones 3- 4 cm; calyx paleaceous-pappiform; fruit a 2-4- seeded craspedium.
Sp.
1, of campo mpestre in s. Minas Gerais, Brazil.
A mimosa of marked individuality, M thomista fits into no preconceived subdivision of ser. Mimosa.
In size, texture and venation of the leaflets it recalls M dolens var. anisitsii, and in foliage and pappiform calyx the nearly sympatric M dolens var. rigida; but it differs decisively from M. dolens sensu lato in normal acropetal maturation of the capitula (most of which are 2- 3, not solitary, at each node), and in craspedial dehiscence of the fmit.
It accords well enough in most technical characters with subser. Brevipedes, but its pappiform calyx and elaborately reticulate leaflets have no counterpart there.
The coarse indumentum of retrorse setae that clothes all axes of the inflorescence is another striking character.
434.
Mimosa thomista Bameby, sp. nov., signis supra sub subserie monotypica Thomistis enumeratis ab affinibus diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Sao Thome das Letras, ±30 km n. of Caxambii, 28.11.1975 (alabastra cum leguminibus annotinis), W. R. Anderson (with Hatschbach, Barneby & Gates) 111612.—Holotypus, MBM 35476; isotypi, K, NY, R, S. Macrophyllidious unarmed subshrubs from woody root, the solitary or few purpUsh-castaneous, simple or distally few-branched wandlike stems ± 1 (when protected attaining 2) m, setose like lf-stks with straight, widely loosely retrorse setae to 1.5-2.5 mm, amply foliate to middle or beyond and thence passing into a simple efoliate pseudoraceme of globose capitula 2-5 dm, the axes ofinflorescence retrorsely strigulose and minutely pubemlent, the plane coriaceous, concolorously brown-olivaceous lfts glabrous except for marginal setae, reticulately venulose on both faces.
Stipules firm erect, lanceolate 7-10 x 1.2-2 mm, glabrous facially, coarsely 3-nerved, setoseciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 3-6.5 cm, at middle 1.3-1.7 mm diam., the ventral groove broad and very shallow; spicules 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of each 5-8 cm, the laterally compressed, ventrally 2-costate interfoliolar segments (5-)7- 15 mm, the narrow sulcus between ventral ribs intermpted at insertion of lfts by a corneous thickening, the pulvinules short, transversely dilated, nigrescent; lfts 5-8-jug., a little decrescent proximaUy, thefirstpair 1.5-2.5 mm distant from lanceolate (unequal) paraphyllidia 1-2.5 mm, the blades obliquely broad-lanceolate and deltately acute to ovate or elliptic-obovate and obtuse mucronulate, the longer ones 33-40 x 13-21 mm, 1.3-2.6 times as long as wide, all coarsely 5-7 nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the lateral primary nerves brochidodrome shortly within the corneous pallid margin, all primary nerves several-branched and the branches anastomosing into an open irregular reticulum, the larger areoles ±1-1.5 mm diam., the single file of cilia forwardly appressed and free through ±1.5-2 mm.
Peduncles fasciculate by 2-3, in fmit 1-2 cm; capitula not seen in flower, but shortly before anthesis moriform 8 mm diam., the obtuse 4-angulate and vertically 4-sulcate fl-buds microscopically papillate glabrous; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1.5-2 x 0.2- 0.3 mm, glabrous dorsally, setose-ciliolate;y/ovvers (described from annotinous remnants) 4-merous 4-androus; calyx pappiform-paleaceous 2.5-3 mm, the lobes divided nearly or quite to base into slender stramineous setae; corolla 4-4.2 mm, narrowly funnelform, the subcorneous cymbiform, dorsally carinate lobes 1.2- 1.4 X 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments free to base, not seen entire.
Pods ± 10-25 per capitulum, sessile, forming a round but compressible sphere ±27- 33 mm diam., in outline oblong-elUptic 8-17 x 5-7 mm, (1-)2-4-seeded, the replum 0.7-1 mm wide, at apex either abmptly obtuse or stoutly cuspidate, armed with pluriseriate erect stramineous setae of various calibers, the longer ones 4-5 mm, the papery valves separating when ripe from replum and breaking up into biconvex glabrous, weakly venulose articles 3-4.5(-5) mm long; seeds not seen.
In campo mpestre, sometimes sheltered in pockets of sandstone caprock, near 1200 m, known only from S. Thome das Letras, ± 30 km n. of Caxambu, near 21°45'S, 45°W on n. slope of Sa. da Mantiqueira in s. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-H. IV-V(-?).
E(ii.27).
Series MIMOSA subseries POGOCEPHALAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Pogocephalae Bameby, subser. nov., calycis campanulati minuti vel fere obsoleti ore glabro vel setulis ciliaribus minimis obsito, leguminis valvulis maturis integris et intus anguste transverse septiferis (M setistipulae autem anomalae calyce interdum asymmetrico et legumine articulato), necnon dispersione geographica per Brasiliae austroorientalis tropicae montes elatos inter Mimosas veras conjugatifolias notabiles.—Sp. typica: M. pogocephala Bentham.
Mostly erect shrubs 1-3 m with defoliate tmnks, but one (M multiplex) a low herb, unarmed (except sometimes in M ernestii), the often solitary, rarely 2-3-nate, globose or plumply ovoid capitula axillary to coeval or soon hysteranthous lvs, pseudoracemose only in praefloration or early anthesis, the fmits axillary; indumentum silky-lanate to almost 0, the cauline setae, when present, smooth or (in aberrant M setistipula) scabemlous, often mixed with pubemlence but never glandular, the lft-margin discontinuously setose-ciliate or less often naked; stipules 1-3- nerved, either persistent or deciduous; leaf-formula i/7-20(-23); lf-stks 0-5 cm, espiculate; rachis of pinnae 1.5-9 cm; larger lfts (5.5-)7-25 mm, all (1-)3-5-nerved; capitula without filaments (4.5-)5-8(-10) mm diam.; calyx campanulate (0.1-)0.2-0.6 mm, the rim either glabrous, or minutely ciliolate, or rarely with random setulae, in M setistipula one abaxial lobe developed and pappiform-decompound; corolla 2-3, in M bombycina 3.1-4.2 mm, the lobes scarcely thickened; filaments free or rarely shortly monadelphous below the ovary; pod sessile, in profile oblong 10-30 X 5-10.5 mm, either compessed or turgid, (1-)2-4-seeded, the replum usuaUy 0.65-1.2 mm, in M ernestii to 2 mm, in M setistipula only 0.35-0.5 mm wide, the valves in the majority firm or subcmstaceous and not or imperfectly (or tardily) articulate, produced inward as narrow membranous interseminal septa, but the fmit ofM setistipula a conventional craspedium.
Spp. 8, of montane dispersal between 18° and 22°30'S in Minas Gerais and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in high campo and about sandstone and laja outcrops.
The first six species of subser. Pogocephalae form a morphologically, ecologically and geographically coherent group, differing considerably, it is tme, in pubescence and stature, but retaining in common a diminished calyx and an essentially valvate pod with broad replum and (sometimes vestigial) interseminal septa.
In gross aspects these Pogocephalae resemble subser. Dolentes, except for discontinuously marginate or even marginally naked leaflets, lack of a terminal capitulum, and capitula containing few fertile flowers (therefore not forming an incompressible sphere of pods).
The foliage of all these Pogocephalae tums a rich brown when dried, a feature that is not diagnostic but contributes to a common and distinctive facies.
Mimosa ernestii, as yet very imperfectly known, appears (on thin present evidence) to be an outlying member of subser. Pogocephalae, isolated on the Organ Mountains well to the south of the subseries' main center of diversity.
Of two collections studied, one is unarmed and one armed at nodes with an infrapetiolar aculeus, foreign to the rest of the subseries; but other characters are compatible with Pogocephalae.
With misgivings I also include, as an admittedly anomalous element, M. setistipula, which has the habit and habitat of average Pogocephalae but a perfectly normal craspedium with narrow replum, a calyx sometimes developing one adaxial pappiform-paleaceous lobe, and scabemlous setae of stem and pod.
It may conceivably be an outlying member of subser. Brevipedes, but its tme kinship can only be guessed at and its inclusion in subser. Pogocephalae is a stopgap measure.
The three species of subser. Pogocephalae known to Bentham in 1875-1876 were divided between sect. Meticulosae subdivisions 'Eriocaules' (M pogocephala) or 'Vulgares' (M setistipula) and sect. Pedunculosae (M multiplex).
The affinity of the last, which contrasts with other especially because of their turgid, valvately dePogocephalae in its low herbaceous stature, behiscent fmits, it seems likely that M pogocephala came apparent only with the recent discovery of and the immediately related M bombycina are M. adamantina, and this pair is directly conthe most advanced known members of the group, nected to the nucleus of subser. Pogocephalae It is of interest to note that similarly turgid fmits only through the also newly described M parviwith broad replum and valvate dehiscence have ceps.
The order of presentation of the compomade an independent appearance in similar nents of this subseries does not effectively reflect planaltine habitats in the diplostemonous ser. their probable evolutionary relationships.
BePachycarpae. cause of their long silky-setose indumentum and Conspectus of subser. Pogocephalae Mimosa * Unarmed; setae smooth; dehiscence of pod essentially valvate; Sa. do Espinhago. t Shmbs; indumentum at anthesis lanate; pod turgid, with broad interseminal septa.
435. pogocephala Bentham 436. bombycina Bameby a. bombycina b. pluriceps Bameby tt Shrubs; indumentum from the first strigose, hispid, or almost lacking; pod strongly compressed, with narrow interseminal septa.
437. parviceps Bameby 438. montis-carasae Bameby 439. adamantina Bameby a. adamantina b. hebecarpa Bameby ttt As tt, but a slender herb.
440. multiplex Bentham ** Sometimes armed shmbs; setae smooth; dehiscence valvate; Sa. dos Orgaos, Rio de Janeiro.
441. ernestii Harms *** Unarmed shrubs of Sa. do Espinhago; setae scaberulous; dehiscence craspedial.
442. setistipula Bentham Key to species of subser. Pogocephalae 1.
Stems either strigose or hispid with straight setae, or silky-lanate with fine flagelliform ones; lf-stks 0- 10 mm; lfts either glabrous or pubescent facially, if glabrous then strongly setose-ciliate.
2.
Setae of stems and pods scabrous below middle; pod a conventional craspedium 442.
M. setistipula (p. 727).
2.
Setae of stem and pod smooth; valves of pod separating from replum in one piece, sometimes tardily and irregularly articulate but only after discharge of seeds.
3.
Young stems silky-lanate with fine flagelliform setae; pods either hispid or silky-pilose with contiguous setae that conceal face of valves.
4.
Lfts of longer pinnae 14-20-jug., and to 2.5-^.5 mm wide; capitula without filaments 6-8 mm diam., the coroUas 2.4-2.9 mm; calyx randomly cUiolate; pod hispid overaU with coarse broad-based setae, consequently bur-like; along Sa. do Espinhago from Sa. da Piedade to Sa. de Tiradentes, lat. 19''50'-21°10'S 435.
M. pogocephala (p. 720).
4.
Lfts of longer pinnae 9-16-jug., and to 4-10 mm wide; capitula without filaments 9-10 mm diam., the corollas 3.1-4.2 mm; calyx glabrous; pod silky-lanate overall with extremely fine flageUiform setae to 2.5-4.5 mm, cocoon-like; along Sa. do Espinhago from Diamantina to Sa. do Cipo, ± lat. 18''10'-19^20'S 436.
M. bombycina (p. 721).
3.
Young stems strigose or hispid; pod either hispid or strigose, but if hispid the setae separated by spaces nearly as wide as or wider than their dilated base, the pod consequently neither burnor cocoon-like.
5.
Inflorescence determinate, the furthest capitulum reaching anthesis prior to those immediately next below it; cf M. dolens var. acerba (p. 583).
5.
Inflorescence indeterminate, the capitula maturing in acropetal sequence.
6.
Unarmed shmbs of Sa. do Espinha^o in centr. Minas Gerais; lfts 8-13-jug.; pod pilose or setose with trichomes much less than 1 mm basal diam. 7.
Stipules persistent on defoliate annotinous branches; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam.; pod pUose with ascending setae; e. of Diamantina (near 18°30'S) at ± 1000 m 437.
M. parviceps (p. 723).
7.
Stipules deciduous with associated If; capitula without filaments ±7 mm diam.; pods thinly hispid wUh erect setae; Sa. do Cara9a (near 20°20'S) at 1500-1900 m 438.
M. montis-carasae (p. 724).
6.
Randomly aculeate shmbs of Sa. dos Orgaos in Rio de Janeiro; lfts 10-17-jug.; pod coarsely hispid with erect setae to ± 1 mm basal diam 441.
M. ernestii (p. 727).
Stems atrocastaneous glabrous; lf-stks 5-40 mm; lfts usually glabrous unless vestigially ciliolate, rarely microscopically puberulent.
8.
Shmbs 6-30 dm with defoliate trunks and leafy annotinous branches; stipules 0.4-0.9 mm wide; filaments exserted 5-8 mm; pods either glabrous or setose with trichomes not over 0.3 mm basal diam.; Diamantina and vicinity (18''-18°30'S) 439.
M. adamantina (p. 724).
8.
Herbs 2.5-4 dm with diffiise leafy stems arising yearly from rootstock; stipules 0.8-1.5 mm wide; filaments exserted ±3 mm; pods thinly hispid with grossly dilated setae to 0.5-0.7 mm at conic base; Belo Horizonte and vicinity (near 20°S) 440.
M. multiplex (p. 726).
435.
Mimosa pogocephala Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 382.
1841.-"BrazU, Sello.'\ the data expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 333.
1876 to: "in provincia Minas Geraes."
—Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Hook.,
fl, fr)!; presumed isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1357\ G! K (hb. Benth.,
fl)! W! M. erinacea Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 383.
1841.— "Brazil, Sello; Morro Vermelho [s.-e. of Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais], Langsdorff(proper\y Riedel, as corrected by Bentham, 1876: 333]."—Lectotypus, Riedel 642 (10), K!; isotypi.
A! GH! US! = NY Neg. 7755<5!-Equated by Bentham, 1875: 403, with M. pogocephala.
M. eriocaulis Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 383.
1841.— "Brazil, Pohl."
, the data expanded in Martius, R. bras. 15(2): 333.
1876 to: "in Serra dos Pinheiros provinciae Goyaz .
.
. [conjecturally = Banderinha do Pinheiros s. of Queluz, Minas Gerais]."—Holotypus, Pohl d.l366 = 1616, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1821; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 13161 F! = F Neg. 54834, K (hb. Hook.)! NY! W! M. pogocephala, M. eriocaulis sensu Bentham, 1875: 403.
M. insidiosa sensu Glaziou, 1906: 178 (15927, P!); non Bentham.
Erect unarmed, stiffly branched shrubs 8-16 (-20) dm with naked defoliate trunks and leafy homotinous branches 2^(-5) mm diam., variable in indumentum but the new branchlets silkyvillous-tomentose with fine gray or sordid flageUiform setae "which lose their sericeous tip when old, the moderately ample subconcolorous, when dry dull brown lfts glabrous except for marginal setae to gray-puberulent beneath or on both faces and sometimes in addition thinly finely setose dorsally, the short-pedunculate, globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary or geminate in the axil of hysteranthous lvs, the young inflorescence pseudoracemose and exserted to ± 1 dm but soon becoming leafy-bracteate, the fruiting capitula lateral and ± immersed in foliage.
Stipules firm erect, broadly lanceolate or triangularacuminate 2.5-7 X 0.8-2 mm, early dry caducous, absent from fruiting specimens.
Leaf-stalks including hard pulvinus commonly stout and 2- 10 X 1-1.5 mm, at times more slender and elongate to 15 X 0.7 mm, the shallow ventral groove often concealed by vesture; pinnae 1-jug., their rachis to 4.5-8(-9) cm, shorter only in late bracteiform lvs, dorsally rounded and pubescent like stem, carinate ventrally and laterally, shaUowly excavate lengthwise between successive pulvinules, the longer interfoliolar segments 2.5-4.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (12-)I4-20(-23)-jug., abruptly decrescent at base of rachis, more gradually so distally, the smaU first pair 0.7-1.5 mm distant from lance-subulate paraphyUidia 0.5- 1.7 mm, all in outline eUiptic-oblong or obliquely ovate from semicordate base, at apex obtuse apiculate or deltately acute, those near mid-rachis (6.5-)7.5-15 X (2.2-)2.5-4.5 mm, 2.4-3.5 times as long as wide, the plane, when dry papery brittle blades 4-5-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib dividing blade ± 1:1.5-2, the one anterior and inner posterior nerves produced well beyond mid-blade, the usually two outer posterior ones shorter, all usually immersed on upper face (exceptionally prominulous), weakly elevated on lower, secondary nervules only rarely perceptible, the discrete marginal setae free at tip for only 0.1-0.5 mm or flagelliform to 1-2.3 mm.
Peduncles at anthesis (not well known) less than 1 cm, in fnut 5-22 mm; capitula without filaments 6-8 mm diam., as long or a little longer, prior to anthesis moriform but the obtuse gray-puberulent 4-keeled fl-buds scarcely longer than or ± as long as bracteal cilia; bracts linear-oblanceolate ±2-2.5 mm, setose both dorsally and marginally or simply ciliate, the cilia to 1-1.5 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some proximal ones staminate and a little shorter; calyx membranous 0.25-0.4 mm, the undulate or subtruncate rim with a few random setulae 0.2-1 mm; corolla narrowly funnelform 2.4-2.9 mm, the cymbiform lobes 0.7-0.9 x 0.6-0.7 mm, densely puberulent extemally on either side of glabrous keel; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 5-6 mm.
Pods 1-12 per capitulum, sessile, oblong-ellipsoid compressed but turgid 10-16 x 6.5-8.5(-9) mm, 2-4-seeded, the replum 0.7-1.2 mm wide, produced at apex into a conic point 0.5-1.3 mm, the firm valves consisting of livid exocarp ±0.2 mm and crustaceous endocarp ±0.1 mm thick in section, when ripe low-colliculate over each seed, separating in one piece from replum and from each other, the endocarp produced between seeds as a membranous septum 0.3-1 mm wide, the replum and valves alike hispid with crowded erect, basally dilated setae of different calibers, those of replum mostly bulbiform and less than 1 mm, those of valves commonly attenuately flagelliform and attaining 1- 2.5 mm, the whole pod resembling a rusty-brown bur.
In campo rupestre on iron-rich soils, on steep stony hillsides, and in crevices of outcrops, 900- 1850 m, locally plentiful about the summits and higher slopes of Sa. do Espinha90 between 19°50' and 21°10'S (Sa. da Piedade and Sa. da Moeda s. to Sa. de Tiradentes) in s.-centr. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-Fl.
VI-IX(-I); fr.
I-III. In 1841, when Bentham described M. pogocephala, M. erinacea andM eriocaulis, there were only four collections available for comparison, and only one of these showed the fmit.
Material accumulated and by 1875 Bentham realized that the first two propositions were based on the flowering and fruiting stages of one species, endemic to central Minas Gerais.
No further example of M. eriocaulis had come to hand, and the initial misconception as to its origin in Goias supported the idea that it was different from the rest, although no better distinguishing characters could be found (Bentham, 1876: 297, in clave) than relatively long peduncles and short floral bracts fully exposing the flower-buds.
Variation in pubescence ofM. pogocephala is related to dispersal but not fully or exactly so.
All material seen from Sas. da Moeda, do Curral, do Itabirito and from the immediate environs of Belo Horizonte is characterized by leaflets graypuberulent on both faces.
The type of M eriocaulis, believed to have been collected on the road between Queluz and Barbacena, has leaflets puberulent beneath only, glabrous above.
Both these pubescence-states occur on Sa. da Piedade.
Plants from the southernmost known locality on Sa. de Tiradentes also have leaflets glabrous above, and are further peculiar for more explicit venulation and for long-tailed setae.
Fruits from this serra are needed to confirm the specific identity.
Mimosa pogocephala is apparently replaced on Sa. do Cipo and on Sa. do Cara9a by M bombycina and M montis-carasae, respectively.
The sympatric M multiplex is readily distinguished by low herbaceous stature and glabrous stems.
436.
Mimosa bombycina Bameby, sp. nov., M pogocephalae, meridiem versus vicariae, affinis, sed foliolis ut infra sub varietatibus notatur majoribus tamquam minus numerosis, capituUs pauUo crassioribus, calyce minimo nudo (nec ore ciliolato), et imprimis legumine setis gracilibus elongatis lanato-bombycino (nec hispido-lappaceo) diversa.—Typus infra sub var. bombycina indicatur.
Erect unarmed shrubs attaining 2 m, with 1- few virgate defoliate trunks and coarse fewleaved, simple or once forked hornotinous branches ±2.5-4 mm diam. densely silky-lanate with extremely fine entangled, gray flagelliform setaeto 2-5 mm, the lvs similarly but less densely lanate beneath, finely puberulent above, discontinuously setose-ciUate, the densely pilosulous capitula either axillary to distal lvs and forming a subcorymbiform leafy-bracteate pseudoraceme or serial in many successive If-axils along hornotinous branches.
Stipules firm, broadly or narrowly lanceolate 4.5-10 x 1.5-2 mm, densely lanate extemally their whole length or merely scabrous distally, glabrous within, tardily deciduous.
Leafstalks stout 5-15 mm, enveloped in silky wool, the ventral groove shallow; pinnae 1-jug., their axis 5-8 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 4-7.5 mm; lfts 9-16-jug., a little decrescent upward from near mid-rachis, the first pair 1.5—4 mm distant from lanceolate paraphyllidia 1-2 mm, the blades obliquely elliptic or oblong-elUptic from broadly semicordate base, abruptly apiculate, those at mid-rachis (11-)I3- 25 X 4-10 mm, 2-2.8(-3) times as long as wide, all 4-5 nerved from pulvinule, the straight midrib dividing blade 1:1.3-2, either simple or giving rise on each side to 3-5 secondary venules, the midrib and posterior nerve coarsely prominulous on lower face of lfts, the rest weaker.
Peduncles in fruit 1.5-3 cm; capitula (not seen at anthesis) apparently ovoid and without filaments ±9-10 mm diam.; bracts narrowly lanceolate 2.5- 3 X 0.4 mm, densely silky-setose dorsally from base upward; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx shallowly campanulate ±0.2 mm, the rim obscurely undulate glabrous; corolla subcylindric 3.1-4.2 mm, the concave but scarcely thickened lobes 0.8-1.2 x 0.5-0.6 mm, silky-pilosulous extemally at tip; filaments (pink?) free, exserted ±6.5 mm.
Pods ±2-12 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong-elUptic or broadly oblanceolate, without indumentum 14-17 x 6-6.5 mm, compressed but turgid, the straight replum 0.7-0.9 mm wide, produced at apex into a conic point, the ripe valves coUiculate over each of (3-)4 seeds, differentiated into livid exocarp and crustaceous endocarp each less than 0.1 mm thick in section, when ripe separating in one piece both from the replum and from each other, the replum and valves alike concealed by fine smooth, pale silvery-brown setae attaining with their flagelliform tip 2.5-4.5 mm, the endocarp produced between seeds as a hyaline transverse septum to ± 1 mm wide; seeds plumply obovoid or variably distorted by pressure from the endocarp, 3.5-5 x 2.3-3.3 mm, the testa dull, fuscous or soot-black, smooth or minutely punctate, the convex lens paler.
Mimosa bombycina, one form of which, discovered by Glaziou near Diamantina, was recognized by Taubert as undescribed but never formally published, is related to the vicariant M pogocephala.
It differs in fewer, larger leaflets, somewhat thicker capitula, minute glabrous calyx, and especially in the densely silky, not hispidly bur-like pod.
It is known from two highly localized populations which appear varietally distinguishable.
Key to varieties of M bombycina 1.
Larger lfts 13-25 x 6-10 mm; midrib of lfts pinnately branched, the raised secondary venules 2-3 pairs; inflorescence pseudocorymbose, of 2- 3 capitula from subterminal If-axils; Sa. do Cip6 near 19°30'S 436a. var. bombycina (p. 722).
1.
Larger lfts 11-13 x 4^.5 mm; midrib simple; inflorescence of numerous capitula arising serially along length of homotinous stems; Biribiry near Diamantina, near 18°15'S 436b. var. pluriceps (p. 722).
436a. IVIimosa bombycina Bameby var. bombycina.
M bombycina Bameby, sens, str.—Foliola majora 13-25 x 6-10 mm, penninervia, costa utrinque nervulos 2-3 secundarios gignenti; inflorescentia subterminalis subcorymbosa pauciceps.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: Sa. do Cip6, ± 130 km n. of Belo Horizonte, 1150 m, 17.11.1968 (fr), Irwin (with Maxwell & Wasshausen) 20i^9.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Differential characters as given in key to varieties, otherwise as the species.
On steep rocky hillsides and about sandstone outcrops, 1100-1200 m, known only from the vicinity of the type-locality, in campo rupestre on the crest of Sa. do Espinha90 near 19°20'S in centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.-H. VII-XII(-?).
436b. JVIimosa bombycina Bameby var. pluriceps Bameby, var. nov., a var. bombycina foliolis pauUo angustioribus 4-4.5 (nec 6-10) mm usque latis, costa sua simplici (nec pinnatim ramulosa), capitulisque seriatim secus caulem homotinum dispositis numerosis (nec paucis subterminalibus pseudocorymbosis) diversa.-BrazU.
Minas Gerais: Buibiry, 24.
III.1892 (fr), A. Glaziou 19131.-Holotypus, P = NY Neg. 11809; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1396, CM arachnoides Taubert ex Glaziou, BuU.
Soc. Bot. France 53(]VIem.
3b): 184.
1906, nom. nud. Differential characters as given in key to varieties, otherwise as the species.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be expected in campo mpestre associated with cliffs and outcrops, known only from the type-station at Biribiry w. of Diamantina, near crest of Sa. do Espinha^o at lat. 18°15'S in centr. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-H. (?-)II-III. 437.
IVIimosa parviceps Bameby, sp. nov., e grege M pogocephalae extricanda, ab ipsa M pogocephala statura arborescenti, stipulis persistentibus, foliolis usque 10-13 (nec 13-23)-jugis, capituUs absque filamentis 5-6 (nec 6-8) mm diam., pedunculis fructiferis (12-)20-35 (nec 5-22) mm longis et praecipue legumine anguste oblongo-elliptico pro rata angustiori, de latere viso 18-25 x 5-6 (nec 10-16 x 6.5- 9) mm, valvulis pube piloso-setiformi tenui (nec grosse tuberculato-setiformi) obsitis diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: ±13 km e. of Diamantina, 1000 m, 14.
III.1970 (fr subannotin.), Irwin (with Fonseca, Souza, Reis dos Santos & Ramos) 2750i.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, ISTY, P, R, S, U S . - 18 km e. of Diamantina, 1000 m (caeteris praecedentis), 14.
III.1970 (fl), 27480.-Varatypi, C, G, K, LE, MBM, NY, P, R, S, UB, US. M. setistipula sensu Glaziou, 1906: 180, ex parte (19126); non Bentham.
Unarmed arborescent shrubs attaining 3 m, with virgately erect, few-forked homotinous branches at once puberulent and hispid like lfaxes with stiff but slender, narrowly ascending setae to ± 1 mm, nowhere lanate, the subconcolorous dull brown-olivaceous lfts either finely minutely gray-puberulent overall or the distal ones facially glabrous, all discontinuously setoseciliate, the small globose capitula solitary or seldom geminate in axil of contemporary or immediately hysteranthous lvs near apex of growing branchlets, soon surpassed by leafy axis, the pods lateral and immersed in foliage.
Stipules firm lanceolate 4-5 x 0.6-1 mm, pubescent dorsally like adjacent stem, persistent after fall of associated If Leaf-stalks including firm pulvinus 2-5 X 0.6-1 mm, shallowly grooved ventrally; pinnae 1-jug., their axis 3-6(-6.5) cm, the longer interpinnal segments 2.5-4.5 mm, shallowly excavate laterally between successive lfts; lfts 10- 13-jug., Uttle graduated, the unequal first pair 2- 3 mm distant from usually small subulate, rarely dUated and foliolar paraphyllidia, the thin-textured blades narrowly oblong-elUptic from semicordate base, obtuse-apiculate or deltately acute, the longer ones 9.5-14.5 x 2.5-4.5(-4.7) mm, 2.8-3.8 times as long as wide, 4(-5)-nerved from pulvinule, the veins immersed above, weakly prominulous beneath, the simple or obscurely few-branched midrib dividing the blade 1:1.3- 2, the inner posterior nerve produced beyond mid-blade, the rest shorter.
Peduncles (15-)20- 35 mm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid 4-keeled fl-buds densely gray-puberulent above middle; bracts narrowly oblanceolate ±1.5 mm, either puberulent or glabrate dorsally, weakly setoseciliate; yZow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, many proximal ones functionally staminate; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate 0.2-0.3 mm, the angulate rim microscopically ciliolate; corolla narrowly funnelform 2.2-2.7 mm, the concave, scarcely callous lobes 0.8-1 x 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 7-8 mm.
Pods (1-)2-5 per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong-eUiptic (12-)18-25 x 5-6 mm, 3.5-5 times as long as wide, (2-)3^-seeded, the replum 0.9-1.1 mm wide, the stiffly papery, ultimately crustaceous and brittle valves at once puberulent and pilose with slender ascending setae to 1.5 mm, when ripe separating from replum and from each other but only tardily falling, after discharge of seeds erratically breaking up into articles 5- 5.5 mm long, the endocarp septiferous as in M pogocephala; seeds not seen.
In cerrado, on brown sandy soils associated with sandstone outcrops at ±1000 m, known only from upper e. slopes of Sa. do Espinha90 at points 13-18 km e. of Diamantina, near 18°20'S in centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil; possibly also (Glaziou 19126, lacking field-label and perhaps mislabeUed, K! P!) at Tripuhy near Ouro Preto at ±20°25'S.-F1.
III-IV(-?); fr. of past season persistent into II. Mimosa parviceps is closely akin to M pogocephala, but apparently different in greater stature, persistent stipules, fewer (10-13, not 12-23) pairs of leaflets in longer pinnae, longer peduncles but smaUer capitula, and particularly in the longer, proportionately narrower pod pilose with ascending, minutely scaberulous setae, not coarsely hispid with stout, bulbous-based smooth ones.
The also closely related M montis-carasae has deciduous stipules, somewhat thicker capitula, and pod thinly hispid with vertically erect setae.
It is found at greater elevations (1500- 1900 m) and at points distant about two degrees of latitude southward along Serra do Espinha90.
A peculiar specimen from close to the typelocality of M parviceps and very similar to it in most characters (CFCR 2276, NY) cannot at present be classified with assurance.
It differs from typical M parviceps in bearing a few small scattered prickles on the stems (unknown in most other Pogocephalae) and in different pubescence of the seemingly more readily articulate pod.
It may represent M parviceps introgressed by some aculeate species, but requires field-observation.
438.
Mimosa montis-carasae Bameby, sp. nov., M pogocephalae intime affinis, ab ea caulibus junioribus hispidis (nec lanatis), stipulis angustioribus 0.5-0.7 (nec 0.8-2) mm latis, pinnarum breviorum 2-5.5 (nec 4.5-9) cm longarum usque foliolis 8-11 (nec 13-23)-jugis, necnon leguminis valvarum setis saepissime longioribus a sese saltem breviter semotis (nec contiguis) diversa. —Brazil.
Minas Gerais: summit of Sa. do Cara9a, 1750-1950 m, 21.1.1971 (fr), Irwin (with Harley & Onishi) 29706.-Holotypus, UB; isotypi, K, NY, P, R, US. Erect unarmed shrubs 1-2 m with blackish defoliate trunks 3-4 mm diam. paniculately branched distally, the densely leafy homotinous branchlets hispid with stiff ascending, tapering but not flagelliform setae to 0.8-1.5 mm, the mature foUage dark green (brunnescent when dry), the lfts either glabrous on both faces, or glabrous above and thinly setose dorsally, or subappressed-setose on both faces, discontinuously setose-ciliate, the peduncles at least in fruit axillary to a few distal lvs, the pods not or scarcely exserted from foliage.
Stipules slenderly lance-acuminate 3-7 X 0.3-0.6 mm, dorsally setulose, deciduous with associated If Leaf-stalks including hard pulvinus 1.5-4 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of each 2-5.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments (2-)2.5-5.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 8-11-jug., little graduated in length, the first pair 1-2 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.8-2 mm, the blades broad-linear, narrowly lance-oblong or oblong-obovate from semicordate base, acute or apiculate, the larger ones (5.5-)8-14 x (2-)2.6-4 mm, 2.7-3.6 times as long as wide, the dorsal face 4-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib and 1 posterior nerve alone prominent, the midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2.
Peduncles solitary or rarely geminate 2-2.5 cm; capitula not seen at anthesis but apparently subglobose and without filaments ±7 mm diam.; bracts linearoblanceolate 1.5-1.8 X 0.3 mm, glabrous dorsally, setulose-ciliolate beyond middle; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx shallowly openly campanulate 0.2 mm, the undulate rim either glabrous or microscopically puberulent; corolla 2.5-2.8 mm, the submembranous concave lobes ± 1 X 0.6 mm, extemally densely gray-pubemlent on either side of glabrous keel; filaments free to base, not seen entire.
Pods ±3-10 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong-elUptic or ellipticobovate (7-) 10-18 X 5.5-7 mm, (1-)2^-seeded, in structure, texture and dehiscence like that of M pogocephala but the replum and valves alike only thinly hispid with tapering curved setae to (1-) 1.5-4 mm and distant from one another by spaces much wider than their basal diameter, the minutely puberulent face of valves not concealed by vesture.
In rock crevices and humus-filled depressions of sandstone caprock, 1500-1900 m, known only from the upper slopes and summit of Sa. do Cara9a in centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.—Fl. ±X-XI; fr.
XII-I. This appears to be a specialized derivative of the M pogocephala complex endemic to the heights of Sa. do Cara^a, where it was first discovered by Peter Claussen (272, BM!).
From the rather polymorphic M pogocephala it differs in hispid, not lanate indumentum of young stems, leaflets variably glabrate or appressed-setose, smaller pinnae and fewer leaflets (as given in the diagnosis) and thinly hispid, not densely setose and bur-like pod.
439.
Mimosa adamantina Bameby, sp. nov., M. multiplici Bentham proxime affinis, ab ea vix nisi statura fmticosa elatiori, caulibus ad anthesin lignescentibus defoliatis 6-30 (nec herbaceis debilibus 2.5-4) dm longis diversa, sed ulterius stipulis plerisque angustioribus sublinearibus, leguminisque valvulis aut glabris aut setis gracilibus strigoso-pilosis (nec setis grossis conicis basi 0.5-0.7 mm usque diam. conspersis) diversa.—Typus infra sub var. adamantina indicatur.
Slender unarmed, erect or assurgent shrubs 6- 30 dm with defoUate annotinous and older tmnks scaly with persistent stipules and atrocastaneous lustrous glabrous annotinous branchlets, the dull brown-olivaceous foliage glabrous except for rare random appressed setulae about the pulvini and pulvinuli, the plane thick-textured lfts sometimes vestigially setulose-ciliolate, the globose capitula solitary in the axil of contemporary lvs, at anthesis scarcely emergent and early becoming lateral immersed.
Stipules firm erect, Unear-attenuate 2-5 X 0.4-0.9 mm, 1-3 nerved, sometimes minutely setulose-ciliolate, persistent.
Leafstalks 5-40 mm, rounded dorsally, 2-ribbed but scarcely sulcate ventrally, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 1.5-5.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-4 mm; lfts 8-14 (-16)-jug., those at each end of rachis a little smaller, the first pair ±1.5-2.5 mm distant from lance-subulate paraphyllidia 0.4-1.1 mm, the blades obliquely lance-oblong or subdimidiately ovate from obtusangulate base, abruptly deltate-apiculate, the longer ones 5.5-10 X (1.7-)2-3.7 mm, (2-)2.2-3.8 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 3(-4)-nerved from pulvinule, the gently incurved midrib dividing blade ± 1:2-2.5, the inner posterior nerve incurved-ascending to beyond mid-blade, the outer posterior ones short or obscure, a weak anterior nerve in some broader blades.
Peduncles 1.5-5.5(-7) cm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid gray-puberulent 4-keeled fl-buds as long as or longer than bracts, these oblanceolate 1.1-1.6 x 0.4-0.6 mm, glabrous dorsally, minutely ciliolate;yZovv^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, only some distal ones bisexual; calyx shallowly campanulate 0.25-0.55 mm, the erose rim microscopically ciliolate with filiform or claviform trichomes; corollas narrowly turbinate or the bisexual ones vase-shaped, 2-2.8 mm, the dull purple, concave but not much thickened ovate lobes 0.7-0.9 x 0.6-0.7 mm, extemally densely puberulent, especially toward the margins; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 5-8 mm.
Pods 1-5 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong or narrowly oblong and abruptly cuspidate 12-23 X (4.5-)5-8 mm, 2-4-seeded, the straight or shallowly constricted replum 0.65-1 mm wide, the rather firmly papery valves separating when ripe both from replum and from each other, imperfectly articulate, the endocarp reddish, the exocarp either glabrous or ascending-setose and either smooth or low-venulose; seeds compressed-biconvex ±4-4.3 x 2.8-3.6 mm, the testa dull, brown around periphery, fuscous on faces.
Mimosa adamantina is closely related to M multiplex, vicariant southward on Sa. do Espinha90 in the latitude of Belo Horizonte.
Common attributes are glabrous or nearly glabrous foliage of dull chocolate-brown hue when dried, a minute calyx, and a relatively short broad pod, the ripe valves of which disarticulate imperfectly or not at all.
Whereas M multiplex is essentially herbaceous, its stems arising yearly from the rootcrown, M adamantina is an assurgent or erect shrub, with older defoliate stems giving rise annually to new leafy and fertile branches.
Furthermore, the stipules of M adamantina are on the average narrower and its filaments further exserted from the corolla.
The pods of M adamantina may be either glabrous or pilose with slender ascending setae, whereas those of M multiplex bear few scattered, grossly dilated conical setae.
Like numerous species endemic to the upper levels of Sa. do Espinhago, M adamantina has differentiated out into locally endemic variants, two of which deserve varietal status.
Key to varieties of M adamantina I. Shrubs 15-30 dm, the slender leafless annotinous and older stems much longer than the homotinous foliate branches; pod smooth and glabrous overall, the valves venulose; n.-w. of Diamantina (Biribiri; S. Joao da Chapada) 439a. var. adamantina (p. 725).
1.
Assurgent shmblets 6-10 dm, the defoliate older stems not longer than current leafy branchlets; pod both puberulent and hispid-strigose with ascending setae to 1-1.5 mm, the valves imperceptibly venulose; s.-w. of Diamantina (toward Gouveia) 439b. var. hebecarpa (p. 726).
439a. Mimosa adamantina Bameby var. adamantina.
M. adamantina Bameby, sens, str.— Brazil.
Minas Gerais: ±10 km s. of S. Joao da Chapada, 1150 m, 27.
III.1970 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Fonseca, Souza, Reis dos Santos & Ramos) 25^75.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, C, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, S, US. Notable in its species for stature (1.5-3 m) and glabrous venulose pod.
In sand-packed fissures and stony slopes on and about sandstone outcrops, ± 1050-1150 m, localized on the crest of Sa. do Espinha^o to the northwest of Diamantina in n.-centr. Minas Gerais, BrazU.—Fl.
X-III. 439b. Mimosa adamantina Bameby var. hebecarpa Bameby, var. nov., a var. adamantina statura humiliori ±6-10 dm et legumine puberulo evenio setis adscendentibus 1-1.5 mm longis usque confertim obsito diversa.—Brazil.
Minas Gerais: ±20 km s.-w. of Diamantina, 1200 m, 20.1.1969 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 22312.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R. S, US. Different from var. adamantina in lower stature (6-10 dm) and particularly in veinless/7(9<^ at once puberulent and hispidly strigose with setae to 1-1.5 mm.
In campo rupestre associated with cliffs and outcrops, 1200-1350 m, known only from high on the w. slope of Sa. do Espinha^o at points 14 and 20 km s.-w. of Diamantina on road to Gouveia, centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.-Fl.
XII-II. 440.
Mimosa multiplex Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 373.
1841.-"BrazU, Sello.'\ but according to label of isotypus at ^B = F Neg. 1343: "Serra da Moeda [mun. Itabirito, centr. Minas Gerais]."—Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K(hb. Benth.)! = NYNeg.
11824; isotypus, Sello s.n.,
G\; probable isotypi, numbered 267, 274, NY! W! M. multiplex sensu Bentham, 1875: 401, 1876: 327.
Functionally herbaceous from slender woody root, the simple or few-branched decumbent stems terete 2.5-4 dm, appearing glabrous but some stipule-margins, lf-stks and peduncles thinly minutely puberulent, the foliage drying dark chocolate-brown and subglaucescent, the lfts either glabrous or minutely puberulent on either face and the margins smooth to weakly setuloseciliolate, the globose capitula either all axillary or some distal ones, especially in praefloration, shortly pseudoracemose.
Stipules erect firm, lanceolate 2.5-5 X 0.8-1.4 mm, persistent or tardily deciduous.
Leafstalks of most lvs 1.5-5 cm (of small lvs sometimes shorter, no further described), at middle 0.3-0.5 mm diam., rounded dorsally, 2-ribbed but scarcely sulcate ventrally; spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (11-) 16-40 (-50) mm, the interfoUolar segments 1.5-3(-3.5) mm; lfts (5-)7-12(-16)-jug., the first pair 1.2-2 mm distant from Unear-elliptic paraphyllidia 0.3-1 mm, the blades oblong-elUptic or sometimes subfalcately oblong from obtusangulate base, deltate-apiculate, the larger ones (5-)7-10 X (1.5-)2.2-3.7 mm, 2.4-3.2 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 4-5-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib moderately displaced, commonly 1-branched near apex, the anterior and posterior nerves expiring near or well beyond mid-blade, the outer posterior ones progressively shorter.
Peduncles solitary or geminate 1.5-4 cm; capitula without filaments (4.5-)5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but the bracts sometimes emergent from between the 4-keeled, antrorsely puberulent fl-buds; bracts linear-elliptic 1-1.8 X 0.3-0.4 mm, 1-nerved, dorsally glabrous or minutely puberulent, deciduous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, only some distal ones bisexual; calyx ±0.4 mm, the obscurely denticulate rim minutely ciliolate; corolla narrowly funnelform 2-2.4 mm, the ovate concave, dorsally carinate lobes 0.6-0.9 x 0.4-0.65 mm; filaments free to base, exserted ±3 mm.
Pods less than 5 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong obtuse but asymmetrically cuspidate, 15-17 x 6.5-7 mm, ±4-seeded, the replum 0.8 mm wide, the livid papery valves coUiculate over each seed, thinly hispid with erect setae arising from dUated conic base to 0.5-0.6 mm diam., when ripe separating in one piece from replum and from each other, the 1-seeded locules 3.5-4 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In unrecorded microhabitats but to be expected in campo mpestre near 1000-1200 m, known only from municipios of Belo Horizonte and Itabirito in centr. Minas Gerais (Belo Horizonte, Sa. da Moeda, Lago Grande), BrazU.— H. IX-I(-?).
The name Mimosa multiplex, one of several proposed by Bentham in 1841-1842 for mimosas collected by SeUo at unknown stations in Brazil, has not since been associated with a plant of known provenance.
The isotype formerly at Berlin that survives in the form of Field Museum Negative 1343 is, however, labelled "Serra da Moeda," and two modem collections from the vicinity (Heringer s.n.,
BRADE 32532; Pabst & al. 7198, NY) confirm its existence near 20°S in central Minas Gerais, not in extratropical BrazU whence came the majority of SeUo's mimosas.
As defined herein, M multiplex is closely related to M adamantina, which replaces it on Sa. do Espinha^o in approximately 18°-l 8°30'S.
Very similar in leaf-formula and floral stmcture, they differ principally in growth-habit, M multiplex being herbaceous, with weak stems arising anew each year from the rootstock, whereas M adamantina is decidedly fruticose, with slender defoliate trunks of one or more years' duration that bear aloft the fertile branches of the current season.
Further small differences in stipules and podvesture are brought out in the key to species.
441.
Mimosa ernestii Harms, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 18: 232.
1922.—"Brasilien: Rio de Janeiro, um 2000 m, im Hochwald der Serra dos Orgaos, Strauch (Ernst Ule no. 4204.— Dez.
1896)."-Holotypus, +B = F Neg. 7477; clastotypus (fragm.), F!—No duplicata found at HBG in 1983.
Stiffly densely branched and closely leafy shrubs attaining 2 m, either unarmed (at least on some branches) or randomly armed at few nodes with straight horizontal, seemingly infrapetiolar aculei to ± 1.5 mm, the terete livid stems and lf-stks sparsely or remotely strigose with forwardly appressed, basally dilated setulae, the subconcolorous foliage brown when dried, glabrous except for discontinuously appressed-setose-ciliate margin of firm plane lfts, the ovoid or globose capitula solitary and geminate in axil of contemporary lvs, racemose in early praefloration but the fruits probably soon immersed in foliage, some persistent on defoliate annotinous branches below new lvs.
Stipules narrowly lanceolate 3.5-6 mm, thinly ciliate, 1-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 8-30 mm, near middle 0.6-1 mm diam., espiculate at apex; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (13-)25-90 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 3-7 mm; lfts 10-17-jug., the first pair 1- 3.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia to 1.4 mm, the blades lance-oblong or semi-ovateoblong from broadly semicordate base, obtusely acuminulate, the longer ones 7-17 x 2.5-6 mm, all veinless above, weakly 3-4(-5)-nerved beneath, the midrib only slightly displaced, faintly 2-3-branched on each side above middle, the inner posterior nerve expiring near or below midblade, the outer ones much shorter.
Peduncles at anthesis less than 1 cm, in fmit ±15 x 2.5 mm; capitula without filaments 5 mm diam., the axis of receptacle 1.5-6 mm; bracts ovate ±1 x 0.35 mm, carinate dorsally, minutely ciliolate, persistent; fls 4-merous 4-androus, some functionally staminate; calyx membranous campanulate ±0.6 mm, the undulate rim minutely ciliolate; corolla turbinate-campanulate 2.2 mm, the firm ovate cymbiform, obscurely 1 -nerved lobes ±1.1 X 0.8 mm, minutely puberulent dorsally; filaments (? pink) united through ±0.3 mm below ovary, exserted ±2 mm.
Pods to 12 per capitulum, sessile and long-persistent on receptacle, in profile narrowly oblong-oblanceolate 25-30 x 9-10.5 mm, 3 ^ seeded, the very stout, almost straight replum 1.5-2 mm wide, armed on back and sides with straight lustrous bronze-stramineous setaculei 2-6 mm and contracted abruptly at apex into a stiff erect cusp 2.5 mm, the firmly papery valves likewise hispid with coarse vertical setae in caliber to 1 mm diam. at dilated base, when ripe separating distally from replum and narrowly gaping, but neither fully deciduous nor articulate; seeds elliptic-obovate in broad view, compressed but plump, in profile ±6.5 x 5 mm, the testa dull brown.
On open rocky hillsides, 1400-2000 m, known only from the heights of Sa. dos Orgaos in state of Rio de Janeiro, BrazU.-R. XII(-?); fr. (?-) VIII. The foregoing description ofM ernestii is partly compiled from the protologue, aided by a phototype and by fragments of the holotype preserved at the Field Museum, and partly from a fruiting specimen, Brade 16626 (RB), also from the Organ Mts. The two collections are essentially similar except that Ule 4204 is remotely aculeate, the other unarmed and more amply leafy.
I feel confident, nevertheless, that they represent seasonal aspects of one species, but a firmer connection between them is obviously desirable.
On the slender evidence provided by them I judge M ernestii to be akin to M pogocephala, from which it differs in thin pubescence and especially in broader pod with heavy replum and hispid mantle of coarse setae 2-6 mm long. The aculei present in Ule 4204 might suggest kinship to extratropical M gymnas and M atlantica, but the valvate pod points rather in direction of M pogocephala and its allies in upland central Minas Gerais.
442.
Mimosa setistipula Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 379.
1841.-"Sierra da Lapa [Minas Gerais, Riedel, commun.] Langsdorff.'' — Holotypus, Riedel 56, K (hb. Benth.)!; isotypus, A! 728 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 M. subvestita Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 379.
1841.— "Serra da Lapa [Minas Gerais, Riedel, commun.] Langsdorff.''-nolotypus, Riedel 16, K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1830; probable isotypus, Riedel 877 ex hb. hort. petrop.,
NY! M. meticulosa var. (?) fuscescens Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 382.
1841.-"BrazU, ^^//a"-Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K!; presumed isotypus, Sello 152, G!—Equated with M. setistipula by Bentham, 1875: 406.
M. setistipulasensu^entham, 1876: 340;Glaziou, 1906: \%0, ex parte (20264, P!).
M. subvestita sensu Bentham, 1876: 338.
Softly woody unarmed shrubs attaining 2 m, the virgate, many-lvd, simple or few-branched stems going out into lax, at anthesis efoliate but hysteranthously leafy-bracteate pseudoracemes to 1-2.5 dm long of ovoid-ellipsoid capitula, the terete stems like all axes of lvs and inflorescence softly pilose with fine, loosely ascending or deflexed-spreading, rufescent, below middle scaberulous setae to ± 1-1.5 mm, the foliage bicolored, the lfts when dry brown above, paler beneath, at once puberulent and subappressedpilosulous on both faces or on upper face simply puberulent, marginally ciliate with slender, forwardly ascending or subappressed tapering setae 1-2.5 mm, not continuously marginate.
Stipules firm erect-incurved, Unear-attenuate 3-7 x 0.3- 1.2 mm, densely setose dorsaUy, glabrous within, persistent.
Leaf-stalks reduced to pulvinus or nearly so, 1.5-3.5(-4.5) mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 2.5-5(-5.5) cm, the interfoliolar segments 2-4.5 mm; lfts 8-14-jug., decrescent at base of rachis and often also upward from near midrachis, the unequal first pair 0.4-2.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.6-1.8 mm, the blades oblong or oblong-elUptic from broadly semicordate base, deltately apiculate, the larger ones 9-15 x 3-6.5 mm, 2-3.3 times as long as wide (in some distal lvs smaller), all veinless above, beneath finely 2-4(-5)-nerved from pulvinule, the simple midrib forwardly displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the inner posterior nerve expiring near or well beyond mid-blade, the outer ones very short or obsolescent.
Peduncles solitary, geminate, or rarely three per node, 1.5-3 cm; capitula without filaments 5-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but sometimes also densely setose, the ovoid 4-keeled fl-buds densely gray-puberulent; receptacle densely setose; bracts Unear-oblanceolate 0.9-1.4 x 0.2-0.4 mm, distally puberulent dorsally and setoseor setulose-ciliate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx usually reduced to a mmute membranous cup or collar ± 0.1-0.15 mm deep, the rim either naked or with a few random setulae to 0.2 mm, but rarely the adaxial lobe pappiform-decompound and to 1.2 mm; corolla narrowly funnelform 2.1-2.7 mm, the concave, scarcely callous 1-nervedlobes ±0.9 x 0.5 mm, puberulent on either side of glabrous keel; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 5-6 mm; ovary (rarely double) glabrous; ovules 4.
Pods ±3-10 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong 10-15 x 5-6 mm, rounded at each end but asymmetrically cuspidate at apex, (2-)3—4-seeded, the replum 0.35-0.5 mm wide and like the papery valves densely hispid with erect or antrorsely curved scaberulous golden-brown setae to 1-2 mm, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling articles 2.5-3.5 mm long; seeds not seen.
In habitats seldom recorded, on Sa. do Itabirito found at edge of gallery woodland at 1500 m, apparently endemic to the crest and upper slopes of Sa. do Espinha90 between Sa. da Lapa and Ouro Branco, lat. ±19°-20°30'S in s.-centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.—R. ±X-II. Mimosa setistipula resembles M lanata and M pogocephala in many respects, but differs from both in rather fewer (8-14, not 14-35 pairs of) leaflets.
It differs further from M lanata in the reduced, minute or strongly asymmetric calyx and narrow stipules.
Mimosa pogocephala also has broader stipules than M setistipula, and a coarsely setose, bur-like, non-articulate pod.
The collections of Martius (369 = F neg.
6769, and 402, both M!) identified by Bentham as M. setistipula represent M dolens var. acerba and var. latifolia, respectively.
E(ii.28).
Series MIMOSA subseries MICROCARPAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Microcarpae Bameby, subser. nov., inter series conjugato-pinnatas praecipue habitu patriaque communibus distincta, caule fmticoso erecto foliis fere vel exacte sessilibus prorsus imbricatis microphyllidiis arete induto, sponte in Brasiliae austro-orientalis atlanticae temperatis occurrentes, inter se calycis forma mire diversae sed filamentis semper (ultra stemonozonam obscuram) liberis, stipulis persistentibus et (M bocainae excepta) striatim 3-pluristriatis notabiles.—Sp. typica: M. microcarpa Bentham.
Stiffly erect, commonly virgate microphyllidious shrubs (0.5-)0.8-2 m, unarmed or (M hilariana only) weakly armed with one small infrapetiolar setaculeus at some or most nodes, the defoliate annotinous and older tmnks usually scabrous with persistent stipular rudiments, the homotinous branches clad in forwardly imbricate V-shaped sessile or subsessile lvs, the lfts weakly or remotely ciliolate, faintly marginate only in one sp., the globose, hemispherical or ellipsoid capitula solitary in distal If-axils, pseudoracemose only in praefloration or earliest anthesis, the fruits lateral and often persistent on defoliate trunks; indumentum of either appressed, or ascending, or at base spreading-recurved and thence incurved-ascending, rarely reflexed (but then basifixed), either smooth or scaberulous, tapering or flagelliform setae sometimes mixed with puberulence, nowhere glandular; stipules usually ovate or lanceolate 3-17- nerved, in M bocainae Unear-attenuate 1 -nerved, in all persistent; leaf-formula i/(6-)8-40(-43); lfstks at most 2.5 mm, commonly reduced to pulvinus, even this obsolete in M hilariana; longer lfts 2-9 mm, the blades usually 2-5(-6)-nerved, sometimes nerveless; capitula without filaments 4-8, in M coniflora to 10 mm diam., prior to anthesis either moriform or conelike; bracts resembling stipules in texture and nervation; calyxtube campanulate 0.1-0.9 mm, either minutely ciliolate or pappiform; bisexual corollas mostly 1.7-2.7, in M congestiflora to 3.8 mm, the lobes not or scarcely thickened, 1-several-nerved; filaments free to base or free beyond an obscure stemonozone; pods subsessile, in profile 6-20 x 4-7 mm, (1-)2-4-seeded, the replum 0.4-1 mm wide, the dehiscence either craspedial or valvate.
Spp. 9, of campo rupestre or moist open riparian, campestral and cloud-forest habitats, especiaUy about rock outcrops and on stream banks, from 700 to about 1700 m (but M lasiocephala perhaps lower), all of local and vicariant dispersal along the Atlantic coast ranges of s.-e. BrazU, from Rio Grande do Sul n.-e. to n.-e. S. Paulo, thence n. through Sa. da Mantiqueira to s. Sa. do Espinha^o in s.-centr. Minas Gerais.
The eponymous prototype of subser. Microcarpae, the only species of the group with which Bentham was acquainted in 1875, was associated in his monograph (Bentham, 1875: 403) with the then-known members of subser. Pogocephalae in the informally named 'Eriocaules' of ser. Meticulosae.
The eight species described below differ collectively from Pogocephalae in stems clothed with ascending, forwardly imbricate, sessile or subsessile insensitive leaves, to which they owe a peculiar facies.
The leaves of Pogocephalae, never so crowded along the stem, are either petiolate or, when subsessile, bear pinnae spreading or declined from vertical, or even deflexed when shocked or wilted.
The characteristic growth-habit of subser. Microcarpae is not supported by any other single feature common to all members, though their dispersal, in a vicariant replacement-series extending north-south, in relatively cool and moist montane habitats, along or close to the crest of the Atlantic slope in southeast Brazil, suggests a recent common origin and real genetic connections.
While there is much individual differentiation in stipules and bracts, in leaflet-number, and especially in development of the calyx and in dehiscence of the fruit, each species of the subseries shares many significant characters with one other, the subseries itself assuming a coherent identity by accretion of these pairs.
Care must be taken in central Minas Gerais to distinguish M microcarpa from M (subser. Obstrigosae) ourobrancoensis, which mimics subser. Microcarpae in habit but is readUy recognized by cauline indumentum of retrorsely appressed, basally spurred setae.
The incompletely known M lasiocephala may be misplaced in subser. Microcarpae, but I can find for it no more likely affinity.
Bentham interpreted Sello's specimens of it as procumbent and placed it next to M reptans in the heterogeneous ser. Pedunculosae, but it lacks the retrostrigulose indumentum of the corolla that characterizes M reptans and its closer alUes.
When rediscovered, its relationships will deserve reassessment.
Conspectus of subser. Microcarpae Mimosa * Stems unarmed; If-pulvinus normally developed. t Dehiscence of pod craspedial; lfts of longer pinnae 20-40-jug.; n.-e. Sta. Catarina to e. S. Paulo.
443. coniflora Burkart 444. congestiflora Burkart 445. reduviosa Bameby 446. bocainae Bameby tt Dehiscence of pod craspedial; leaflets of longer pinnae 10-14-jug.; Rio Grande do Sul. 447. lasiocephala Bentham t t t Dehiscence of pod valvate; lfts of longer pinnae 16-35-jug.; centr. and s. Minas Gerais.
448. itatiaiensis Dusen 449. microcarpa Bentham t t t t Dehiscence of pod valvate; lfts of longer pinnae 8-13-jug.; n.-e. Parana and adj. S. Paulo.
450. paranapiacabae Bameby ** Stems armed at nodes with one small infrapetiolar setaculeus; If-pulvinus suppressed; lfts of longer pinnae 8-12-jug.; dehiscence of pod valvate.
451. hilariana Bamehy Key to species of subser. Microcarpae I. Lfts of longer pinnae 20-40(-43)-jug. 2.
Roral bracts linear-lanceolate or linear, 0.2-0.5 mm wide and at least 3 times as long. 3.
Stipules 1-5-nerved; n.-e. Parana n. to centr. Minas Gerais.
4.
Setae of cauline indumentum narrowly ascending and smooth; calyx membranous 0.4-0.5 mm, the rim sometimes weakly setulose; dehiscence of pod valvate; Sa. de Itatiaia on Minas Gerais-Rio de Janeiro border 448.
M. itatiaiensis (p. 734).
4.
Setae of cauline indumentum proximally retrorse, sometimes tapering into an incurved flagelliform tip, the shaft scaberulous; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 0.8-1.7 mm; dehiscence of pod craspedial; e. S. Paulo and e. Parana.
5.
Stipules linear 1-nerved; lfts slenderly pallid-marginate, 2-nerved to apex; capitula ellipsoid; Sa. da Bocaina, e. S. Paulo 446.
M. bocainae (p. 733).
5.
Stipules lance-attenuate 3-4-nerved; lfts immarginate, 3-4-nerved to apex; capitula globose; basin of rio Jaguariaiva, e. Parana 445.
M. reduviosa (p. 732).
3.
Stipules 10-17-nerved; e. Parana 444.
M. congestifolia (p. 731).
2.
Floral bracts ovate or ovate-elliptic 0.45-2 mm wide and 1-2.5 times as long. 6.
Capitula oblong in profile, without filaments 3.5-4 mm diam.; lfts obovate-elliptic, less than 3.5 times as long as wide; calyx ±0.2 mm, eciliate; corolla-lobes 1-nerved; pod 17-20 mm long, 2- 4-seeded, craspedially dehiscent; n.-e. Sta. Catarina 443.
M. coniflora (p. 730).
6.
Capitula hemispherical, withoutfilaments5.5-6.5 mm diam.; lfts linear-oblong-elliptic, 4-6 times as long as wide; calyx paleaceous-pappiform, 0.8-1.5 mm; corolla-lobes striately venulose; pod 7-9 mm long, (1-)2-seeded, valvately dehiscent; centr. Minas Gerais 449.
M. microcarpa (p. 735).
1.
Lfts of longer pinnae 8-14-jug.; dehiscence of pod valvate.
7.
Plants of Sa. de Paranapiacaba in n.-e. Parana and adj. S. Paulo; stipules striately 5-9-nerved.
8.
Lfts linear, those at mid-rachis 4-7.3 x 0.6-0.9 mm, (5.5-)6-9 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, 2-nerved beneath; calyx pappiform; no setaculeus at base of lf-stk 450.
M. paranapiacabae (p. 736).
8.
Lfts elliptic-oblanceolate or -obovate, those at mid-rachis 3-5.5 x 1.1-2 mm, 2.3-4.1 times as long as wide, delicately 4-5-nerved on upper face, the venation beneath prominulous only proximally, immersed toward blade apex; rim of calyx denticulate, minutely ciliolate; lvs spurred dorsally at base by a smaU deflexed or incurved setaculeus arising at base of If-pulvinus 451.
M hilariana (p. 736).
7.
Plants of Rio Grande do Sul; stipules 3-nerved 447.
M. lasiocephala (p. 734).
443.
Mimosa coniflora Burkart in Reitz, Fl. ilusSlender erect unarmed microphyllous shrubs tr. catarin.
LEGU(l): 226, est. 36 + map. attaining 2 m, with fuscous defoliate annotinous 1979. —"[Brazil] Santa Catarina: Garuva: and older stems strictly branched upward, the Morro do Campo Alegre .
.
.
1200 m .
.
.
Reitz densely leafy homotinous branchlets and the pe- & Klein 10.994 (24.03.1961)."—Holotypus, duncles silky-tomentulose when young with fine SI (not seen); isotypi, NY! US!—Paratypi, Reitz ± entangled, flexuous gray flagelliform setae, the <& Klein 6405, NY! US! pinna-rachises dorsally strigose with straight. forwardly subappressed, remotely scaberulous setae, the subconcolorous imbricate, ventrally concave lfts either glabrous or minutely puberulent facially, a little paler around the margin and weakly setulose-ciliolate, the small oblong capitula solitary in 3-6 distal If-axils, in fruit persistent on defoliate trunks.
Stipules erect papery castaneous ovate 1.5-4 x 1.1-1.8 mm, finely multistriate and minutely puberulent dorsally, weakly ciliolate, becoming dry but tardily deciduous.
Leaf-stalks reduced to the small pulvinus, the one pair of pinnae seemingly sessile within the stipules; pinnae narrowly ascending, mostly 1.5-2.5 (ex char. —4) cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.4-0.7 mm; lfts (17-)20-28(-30)-jug., subequilong, the first pair close to minute setiform paraphyllidia, the blades obovateor oblong-elUptic obtuse from shallowly semicordate base, the larger ones 2-2.7(-3.2) x 0.7-1.4(-1.8) mm, all imperceptibly venulose when young, finally 3-nerved when old and shrivelled.
Peduncles 5-12 mm; capitula without filaments 7-10 X 3.5-4 mm, permanently conelike, the imbricate floral bracts in praefloration as long as or a little longer than the obtuse, apically puberulent fl-buds; bracts resembling stipules in texture, color and venulation, broadly triangular-ovate subacute 1-1.8 X 1-2 mm, glabrous dorsally, weakly arachnoid-ciliolate, persistent;y/ow^r5 4-merous, many lower ones staminate and some of these 8-androus, the distal ones bisexual 4-androus; calyx a minute membranous cup 0.2-0.25 mm, the rim truncate or obscurely denticulate; corolla of staminate fls turbinate ±1.8 mm, with shallowly concave 1 -nerved, scarcely thickened lobes ±0.8 X 0.8 mm, that of bisexual fls a little longer and narrower, the lobes ±0.7 x 0.6 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 5.5-7 mm.
Pods 1-2 from near top of receptacle, sessile, in profile oblong-eUiptic ±17-20 x 7-8 mm, 2-4- seeded, the replum ±1.2 mm wide, not indented between seeds, mucronulate at apex, densely setose with slender, narrowly ascending flagelliform setae to ±2.5 mm, the firmly papery valves comose with similar but less appressed setae, when ripe breaking up into free-falling indehiscent articles 4.5-5 mm long; seeds not seen.
On ledges and in crevices of granitic or gneissic rocks along banks of rapid streams at 900-1200 m, local near the crest of Sa. do Mar in municipios Garuva and Campo Alegre in n.-e. Sta. Catarina, BrazU; to be sought in adj. Parana.— Fl.
II-III. Mimosa coniflora resembles distantly allopatric M. microcarpa in broad multistriate stipules and floral bracts, but differs in minute, not paleaceous-pappiform calyx, in one-nerved, not striate corolla-lobes, and in craspedial, not valvate dehiscence of the pod.
Mimosa congestifolia, its near neighbor on Sa. do Mar, is likewise similar in striate stipules and has a similar craspedium, but its leaflets (to 4.5-9, not 2-3 mm) and peduncles (15-35, not 5-12 mm) are much longer, its calyx is much deeper (0.7-0.9, not 0.2- 0.25 mm), and its corollas much longer (3-3.8, not 1.8-2 mm).
The dimorphic flowers ofM. coniflora, as described above (observed in two capitula only), take the form described by Robinson (1898) under so-called subgenus Astatandra.
444.
Mimosa congestifolia Burkart, Darwiniana 7(4): 527, fig. 5.
1947.-"BrasU.
Estado Parana, Municipio Morretes .
.
.
Serra MarumbI, Crista do Gigante, leg. O. Curial 2.
II.1947.
.
. ."—Holotypus, SI (not seen); isotypi, HBG! RB (622)\ Slender unarmed microphyllidious shrubs 1- 2 m, the defoliate trunks scabrous with persistent stipules or their tattered remnants, stiffly fewbranched distally, the homotinous branchlets strictly ascending, densely clothed in ascending sessile lvs, the intemodes mostly less than 5 mm, the young stems and dorsal face of pinna-rachises densely strigose with forwardly subappressed, tapering or flagelliform, smooth setae 1-4 mm, the foliage olivaceous concolorous, the lfts facially glabrous, remotely setose-ciliolate, the ovoid-ellipsoid capitula solitary in distal If-axils on peduncle shorter than subtending If Stipules erect, broadly lanceolate 2.5-7 x 1-1.7 mm, the chartaceous castaneous blade dorsally glabrous and striately 10-17-nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks 0, the one pair of pinnae arising directly from Ifpulvinus, the rachis 3-5.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1-1.6 mm; lfts (21-)24-40(-43)-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair less than 1 mm distant from paraphylUdia 0.4-1.4 mm, the blades linear or linearoblanceolate from narrowly semicordate base, obtuse at apex, the longer ones 4.5-9 x 0.9-1.4 mm, 4.6-7 times as long as wide, aU veinless above, 3-nerved beneath, the simple subcentric midrib flanked on either side by a weak primary nerve produced almost to blade apex.
Peduncles 1.5-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments 5.5-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts resembling stipules in texture and coloration, linearelliptic 2.5-3.5 X 0.4—0.5 mm, glabrous and finely 3-5-nerved dorsally, pectinately ciliate, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx membranous campanulate 0.7-0.9 mm, the shortly, sometimes asymmetrically toothed rim minutely ciliolate; corolla subcylindric 3-3.8 mm, the tube glabrous, the cymbiform lobes 1-1.2 x 0.6-0.7 mm, puberulent on either side ofprominulous midrib, not thickened at tip; filaments pink, free to base or almost so, exserted 6.5-7.5 mm.
Pods several from middle and top of receptacle, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong 12-25 x ±6 mm, 2-Aseeded, the almost straight replum ±0.5 mm wide, contracted apically into an erect cusp ±2 mm, armed with pluriseriate straight divaricate lustrous setae to 3-3.5 mm, the papery brown valves coUiculate over each seed, thinly shortly ascending-setulose, when ripe breaking up into free-falling articles ±6 mm long; seeds not seen.
Highly localized in cloud-forest of Sa. do Mar at 1200-1700 m in e. Parana, Brazil, between 25°15' and 25°30'S (mun. Campina Grande do Sul, Cuatro Barras, Morretes).—Fl.
I-III. Burkart referred M. congestifolia to ser. Pedunculosae, but could find no particular relative in that series.
The species is in fact much closer to habitally similar M. microcarpa and M. itatiaiensis of central and southem Minas Gerais, the first of which was aligned by Bentham with his ser. Meticulosae.
It has much in common also with M. bocainae and M. reduviosa, newly described species narrowly endemic to eastem S. Paulo and northeastern Parana respectively, which are technically distinguished by reversed setose indumentum of the stems.
In the context of this series of vicariant microspecies M. congestifolia may be recognized by the combination of relatively long pinnae and leaflets, broad striately nerved stipules, and ellipsoid capitula conelike prior to anthesis.
445.
Mimosa reduviosa Bameby, sp. nov., habitu toto, foliorum formula, pubeque e setis scaberulis laxe retrorsis apice flagellatim sericea constanti M. bocainae ut videtur proxima, attamen ab ea foliolis dorso ad apicem usque 3-4(nec 2)-nerviis, capituUs globosis (nec ellipticis), patriaque extratropica abludens.— Brazil.
Parana: mun. Jaguariaiva, Fda.
S. Antonio, 27.
XI.1968 (fl), G. Hatschbach 20101.- Holotypus, MBM 9104 ex parte; isotypus, HBG = NY Neg. 11838. —Parana: mun. Piral do Sul, Joaquim Murtinho, 14.
VI. 1973 (fr), G. Hatschbach 32144.-Faratypi, C, MBM 25567.
NY, US 2705890.
Slender unarmed, virgately erect microphyllidious shrubs ± 1 m, with defoliate scabrous trunk distally few-branched and densely foliate, the homotinous stems and peduncles clad in deflexed, finely flagelliform setae to 1.5-2 mm, the lf-axes similarly but antrorsely silky-setose, the imbricate firm olivaceous subconcolorous lfts glabrous facially, continuously pallid-marginate and finely setulose-ciliolate, the subglobose capitula solitary in the axil of coevally expanding lvs, forming a short foliate pseudoraceme terminal to most branchlets, the fruits persisting on the trunk below new leafy growth.
Stipules firm erect lanceolate 2-3.5 x 0.4-0.6 mm, either glabrous or setulose dorsally, densely setulose-ciliate, 3-4-nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks including hard livid pulvinus 1-2.5 mm; pinnae stiffly ascending 1-jug., the rachis 2-3.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1 mm; lfts 20-31-jug., the small first pair less than 0.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia concealed by setae, the blades Unear-oblong obtuse from bluntly auriculate base, those near mid-rachis ±3.5-6 x 0.75- 1.2 mm, 4-5 times as long as wide, all veinless above, the convex dorsal face finely 4-5-nerved from pulvinule, the simple midrib moderately displaced, the anterior and the inner posterior nerve both produced nearly or quite to blade apex, the pallid margin scarcely 0.1 mm wide, the ascending cilia free for 0.2-0.5 mm.
Peduncles ± 15-35 mm; capitula without filaments 5.5- 6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but silky-setulose overall; bracts linear-oblanceolate 2-2.5 X 0.3 mm, dorsally 1 (-3)-nerved glabrous, setulose-ciliolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx pappiform 1.3-1.7 mm, the lobes decompound to within 0.3-0.5 mm of base; corolla narrowly funnelform 2.2-2.7 mm, the narrowly ovate concave, scarcely thickened but dorsally carinate lobes 0.7-0.8 x 0.45-0.6 mm, extemally silky-setulose on either side of keel; filaments vivid pink, united at base into a stemonozone 0.3-0.5 mm, exserted 6-6.5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods to 10 per capitulum, sessUe, in profile oblong-eUiptic obtuse at both ends, 10-12 x 5-5.5 mm, mostly (3-)4- seeded, the replum 0.7-0.8 mm wide, scabrously setulose along back, along sides charged with dense files of stout erect stramineous tapering setae to 4-5 mm, the papery stramineous valves low-colliculate over each seed, finely ascendingsetose, breaking up when ripe into individually dehiscent articles 2-3(-3.5) mm long, these becoming free from replum but long retained in a mesh of replar setae; seeds (not seen fully ripe) compressed-ellipsoid ±3-3.5 x 2 mm, the testa light brown.
On river bank in cerrado and in brejo at edge ofcampo, at elevations not recorded, known only from the headwaters of rio Jaguariaiva in mun. Pirai do Sul and Jaguariaiva, n.-e. Parana, BrazU.-H. XI-? Mimosa reduviosa appears close kin to allopatric M. bocainae, which it resembles particularly in the retrorsely directed, scaberulous setae of the stems and peduncles (whence the epithet, from reduvium = hangnail).
It differs from this principally in three-, not two-nerved leaflets and in globose, not ellipsoid capitula.
Also similar in habit of growth is M. paranapiacabae, but while virtually sympatric with M. reduviosa this differs more decisively in antrorse, smooth setae of stems and peduncles, in 5-9 (not ± 3)-nerved stipules, in fewer (8-13, not 20-31) pairs of leaflets, and in five-, not one-nerved floral bracts.
Despite the proximally retrorse (but distally often upswept) orientation of cauline setae, M. reduviosa and M. bocainae together appear more closely related to species with antrorse basifixed terete cauline setae than to habitally similar M. ourobrancoensis of subser. Obstrigosae.
The setae of the latter are not simply retrorse, but also stiffly appressed their whole length, dorsiventrally compressed, and minutely spurred at base.
446.
Mimosa bocainae Bameby, sp. nov., hinc M. itatiaiensi illinc M. reduviosae affinis, setis caulinis scaberulis basi retrorsis (nec antrorsus adscendentibus) et calyce paleaceo-pappiformi necnon craspedio maturo articulato a prima diversa et secundae propior, aM. reduviosa praesertim stipuUs l(nec 3-4)-nerviis, foliolis exacte 2 (nec 3-4)-nerviis capitulisque ovoideis (nec globosis) diversa.—Brazil.
S. Paulo: Parque Nacional S. Paulo, Serra da Bocaina, 13.
XI.1980 (fl), P. Occhioni 1217.-Holotypus NY.-Ibid.,
S. Jose do Barreu-o, 12.
V. 1980 (fr mat), /.
C. de Lima (with T. P. Ramamoorthy) 7277.—Paratypus, NY.
Slender unarmed microphyllous shrubs of unrecorded stature, the distally much branched homotinous stems densely clothed with narrow crowded, forwardly imbricate, V-form lvs and densely shaggy-pilose, especially toward flowering nodes, with fine, loosely deflexed and thence inwardly curved or flexuous, densely scaberulous rufescent setae to ±1-1.5 mm, the lf-stks subappressed-pilose with straighter, smoother setae, the brown-olivaceous subconcolorous lfts glabrous facially, weakly discontinuously setuloseciliolate, the narrowly ellipsoid capitula on shaggy-pilose peduncle ± as long as subtending If, the whole inflorescence either simply or paniculately pseudoracemose, the pods persistent on defoliate annotinous stems below the new foliage.
Stipules firm erect, Unear-attenuate 3.5-7 X 0.3-0.5 mm, setose dorsally, glabrous within, 1 -nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks including hard pulvinus 1.5-2 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of each 20-35 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.65- 1.2 mm, low-carinate and obscurely excavate ventrally; lfts 25-33-jug., subdecrescent at each end of rachis, the unequal first pair ±0.5 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia not differentiated), the blades of all linear from obtusely auriculate base, obtuse at apex, those near midrachis (3.2-)3.5-6 X 0.35-1 mm, ±5-7 times as long as wide, the shallowly concave ventral face veinless, the dorsal face weakly 2-nerved from pulvinule (a posterior third nerve, if present, short and obscure).
Peduncles (8-) 12-27 mm; capitula without filaments 7.5-12 x 4.5-5,5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the weakly 4-carinate flbuds distally gray-pilosulous; bracts Unear-lanceolate 1.5-2 X 0.2-0.3 mm, glabrous 1-nerved dorsally, setose-ciliolate;yZovv^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx including pappiform setae 0.8-1.2 mm, the shallowly campanulate, obscurely lobulate tube 0.3-0.6 mm, the cilia not confluent at base; corolla 2.2-2.7 mm, that oflower fls narrowly turbinate, that of upper fls subcylindric, the ovate, scarcely thickened lobes 0.6-0.8 x 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments pink (drying yeUowish), free to base, exserted 5.5-7.5 mm.
Pods several per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong or oblong-elUptic 7-17 x 4-7 mm, 1-2- seeded, the replum 0.7-1.1 mm wide, hispid with Stiff straight erect pluriseriate setae to 4-5 mm, the papery valves coUiculate and weakly setulose over each seed, otherwise glabrous, breaking up when ripe into individually dehiscent articles ±4.5-5 mm long, these free-faUing but often imprisoned by interlocking setae of replum; ripe seeds not seen.
On rocky stream banks and in moist campo near 1700 m, sometimes forming pure thickets, known only from Sa. da Bocaina and its immediate environs, just within the Tropic of Capricorn in the e. lobe of S. Paulo, Brazil.—R. X - XII(-?).
Mimosa bocainae and M. reduviosa are sibling species, suggestively similar in life-form and ecology, in loosely retrorse and scabrous cauline setae, and in form of the craspedium, but are seemingly distinct in several coordinated characters supported by vicariant distribution.
The diagnostic characters of M. bocainae are Unear one-nerved stipules, immarginate leaflets with only two long dorsal nerves, and ellipsoid, not globose capitula.
Mimosa itatiaiensis, which replaces M. bocainae on nearby Mt. Itatiaia, differs from both of these in forwardly ascending, smooth cauline setae and in very small membranous, minutely ciliolate (not pappiform) calyx.
447.
Mimosa lasiocephala Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 372.
1841.-"Brazil, Sello."
- Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1809; isotypi, G! K (hb. Hook.)! W! M. lasiocephala sensu Bentham, 1875: 401; 1876: 327.
Of unknown stature, the virgately branching, perhaps diffuse unarmed, closely foliate stem silky-pilose with fine loose hairs, the lfts either facially subglabrous or thinly puberulent and a little paler beneath, the peduncles solitary in a succession of contemporary If-axils.
Stipules oblanceolate 3-4 mm, finely 3-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaves sessile, the rachises of the one pair of pinnae 1.5-2 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1-1.5 mm; lfts 10-14-jug., decrescent toward both ends of rachis, the blades narrowly oblong obtuse, the longer ones ± 6-7 x 1.5 mm, all veinless above, beneath 3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib subcentric straight (not sigmoidally curved distally), the posterior nerves short and weak.
Peduncles very slender 2.5-3 cm; capitula ovoid, without filaments ±4.5 mm diam.; bracts linear 1.2-2 X 0.15-0.2 mm, densely ciliate, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, the calyx minute, the corolla in profile narrowly oblanceolate ±2 mm, densely gray-pilosulous overall.
Pods when well fertilized 3-4-seeded, in profile 17-20 x 3- 3.5 mm, the shallowly undulate replum 0.2-0.3 mm wide, the papery brown valves breaking up into articles 4-5 mm long. In unrecorded habitat, to be expected in stony campo, known only from the type-collection lacking exact locality, but said by Malme (1931: 13) to have been collected "ad Rio Pardo," inland from Pto. Alegre in Rio Grande do Sul. 448.
Mimosa itatiaiensis Dusen, Arq. Mus. Nac. Rio de Janeiro 13: 56.
1903.—"In parte septentrionali territorii [montis Sa. da Itatiaia], .
.
. verisimiliter in alt. ca. 2500 m.s.m. ab E. Ule inventa."
—Holotypus, Ule 610, Rio Preto, 31.
XII. 1895, R!; isotypus (fragm), S!; presumed isotypus, "rio Preto, Itatiaia," Ule 3709, K! M. microcarpa sensu Glaziou, 1906: 179, ex parte, quoad 8652 (C! G! P! K!), 15926 (C! P! K!).
Stiffly virgate, unarmed microphyllidious shrubs or subshrubs 5 dm upward, with livid defoliate trunk strictly few-branched distally, the homotinous branchlets clad in narrow, subvertically imbricate sessile lvs, hispidulous or in youth silky-setose with ascending brownish flagelliform setae 1-2.5 mm (the flagellum deciduous in age), the thick-textured, ventrally concave lfts glabrous eciliate, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula shortly pedunculate in the axil of distal, coevally expanding lvs.
Stipules firm erect lance-acuminate 3-6 x 0.5-1 mm, 3-5- nerved, setulose dorsally and ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks reduced or almost so to hard setulose pulvinus, 1.5-2 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 1.2-3.5 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.6- 1(-1.4) mm; lfts of longer pinnae (15-)18-25- jug., decrescent toward each end of rachis, the first pair less than 1 mm distant from setiform paraphyllidia concealed by setulae, the blades Unear or lance-elliptic from semicordate-auriculate base, obtuse at apex, those near mid-rachis 4-7 X 0.9-1.6 mm, 4-5.3 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath slenderly 2-4-nerved from pulvinule, the scarcely excentric midrib simple or once forked below middle, the inner posterior nerve produced nearly to blade apex, the rest weak and short.
Peduncles 1-4 cm; cap//w/(3 without filaments ±6-7.5 mm diam.; bracts linear or narrowly oblanceolate 2-3.5 x 0.2-0.4 mm, 1-nerved; y/oH'^r^ 4-merous 4-androus; calyx membranous campanulate 0.4-0.5 mm, asymmetrically denticulate, the rim either naked or with few random setulae; corolla narrowly funnelform 2.5-2.8 mm, the cymbiform but scarcely thickened, dorsally 1-ribbed lobes ±0.8 X 0.5 mm, antrorsely gray-puberulent extemally; filaments free, exserted ±6 mm.
Pods ±2-5 per capitulum, sessile, in profile elliptic or oblong 8-12 X 4.5-6 mm, 2-3 seeded, the replum nearly 1 mm wide, contracted into an apical cusp 1-1.5 mm, the replum and papery valves alike hispid with ascending tapered setae 1-1.5 mm, the ripe valves separating in one piece from replum, the interseminal septa subobsolete; seeds not seen.
In brushy campo at high elevations near crest of Sa. da Mantiqueira on the Minas Gerais-Rio de Janeiro boundary (Ayuruoca; Sa. da Itatiaia).-Fl.
XI-XII(-?).
Mimosa itatiaiensis is closely related to M. microcarpa, found in similar environment on heights of Sa. do Espinhago in central Minas Gerais, but differs in venation of stipules, floral bracts, and coroUa-lobes, as recorded in the foregoing key.
The lower bracts in M. microcarpa are striately 5-9-nerved and form a pseudo-involucre under the capitulum, whereas those of M. itatiaiensis are 1- or exceptionally 3-nerved and each subtends a flower.
No isotype was found in 1984 among Ule's collection at Hamburg.
449.
Mimosa microcarpa Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 403.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 333.
1876, based on M. fasciculata Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 383.
1841, nom. illeg.; non M. fasciculata (Willdenow) Poiret, Encycl. meth.
Suppl. 1: 46.
1810.—No locality given in protologue, but supplied in Martius, 1876, I.e.: ".
.
. in Brasilia interiore v. meridionali, loco accuratius non adnotato: Sello."
-Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Hook.)!; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1340\ K (hb. Benth.)!- Collected very probably on Sa. da Cara^a or near Ouro Preto, Minas Gerais, where Sello was active in late 1818 and early 1819, and again in 1831 (Urban, 1906: 106, 110).
M. microcarpa sensu Glaziou, 1906: 179, ex parte, exclus.
8652, 15926, quae sunt M. itatiaiensis.
M. brevipes sensu Glaziou, 1906: 180 (20263, K!,
plant at right = NY Neg. 1836).
Slender erect, awkwardly few-branched, unarmed microphyllidious shrubs attaining 1.5-2 m, the annotinous and older defoliate trunks 2- 4 mm diam., scaly with residue of stipules, the homotinous branches densely clothed in upwardly imbricate sessile V-form lvs and their epidermis concealed by slender, narrowly ascending, pallidly stramineous, at tip pallidly flagelliform setae to 1-2 mm, the back of lf-stks similarly but less densely setose, the faces alike of stipules and subconcolorous lfts glabrous, the few hemispherical capitula either pseudoracemose and exserted to 1 dm or all axillary to distal lvs and scarcely exserted, and sometimes far surpassed by continued growth of a foliate cauline axis.
Stipules erect papery lanceolate 3-6 x 0.6- 1.4 mm, striately 5-9-nerved, densely setuloseciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks reduced to hard, seemingly insensitive pulvinus 1-1.5 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the stiff rachis 9-33 mm, rounded dorsally, carinate ventrally, excavate laterally between pulvinules, these 0.5-1 mm apart; lfts 2 1 - 35-jug., forwardly imbricate, diminished at each end of rachis, the first pair close to minute setiform paraphyllidia concealed by setae, the blades all linear-oblong-elliptic obtuse, ventrally concave, those near mid-rachis 2.5-3.5(-4) x 0.5-0.8 mm, 4-5.7 times as long as wide, minutely or remotely setulose-ciliolate, all veinless above, beneath weakly 2-nerved, the midrib and single posterior nerve subequidistant from margins.
Peduncles at anthesis 2-5 mm, in fruit 6- 15 mm; capitula without filaments 5.5-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis conelike; bracts elliptic or elliptic-obovate acute 2-3 x 0.45-1 mm, a little accrescent distally, glabrous and striately nerved dorsally, densely setose-ciliate from middle upward, the lower ones concealing the staminate corollas, together forming a sort of involucre; yZow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, only some distal ones bisexual; calyx 0.8-1.5 mm, the unequal lobes erraticaUy decompound to within 0.2- 0.5 mm of base into few capillary divisions; corolla 2-3.1 mm, the narrowly turbinate or funnelform tube pallid glabrous, the ovate, shallowly concave purplish lobes 0.7-1 x 0.5-0.7 mm, weakly barbeUate at tip, deUcately several-nerved; filaments pink, free to base, exserted ±7.5 mm.
Pods ascending, eight or more per capitulum, sessile, strongly compressed, in profile 7-9 x 4- 5 mm, (1-)2-seeded, the replum 0.4-0.6 mm wide, the papery valves at once pubemlent and subappressed-setose with fine yellowish setae to ±1.5 mm, separating in one piece both from one another and from replum, the line of fracture between seeds obscure and apparently never complete; ripe seeds not seen.
In campo rupestre about cliffs and outcrops, at elevations not exactly recorded but to be expected at or above 1100 m, endemic so far as known to Sa. da Cara9a and peaks of s. Sa. do Espinha90 near Ouro Preto (Miguel Bumier; Tripuhy) in s.-centr. Minas Gerais, Brazil.—R. XII(-?).
450.
Mimosa paranapiacabae Bameby, sp. nov., M. bocainae et M. reduviosae affinis, ab ambabus pinnarum rachi breviori 6-15 (nec 20- 35) mm usque longa foliolisque minus numerosis (6-)8-13 (nec 20-33)-jugis, setis caulinis laevibus (nec scaberulis), stipulis striatim 5-9 (nec 1—4)-nerviis, necnon bracteis floralibus 5 (nec l-3)-nerviis diversa.—Brazil.
Parana: mun. Castro, sobre rochas, 950 m, Carambei, rio S. Joao, 17.
XIII.1965 (fl, fr), Reitz & Klein 77565.—Holotypus, US: isotypus, NY.—Parana: mun. Ponta Grossa, Passo do Pupo, 10.
X.1967 (fl), Hatschbach 17366.- Paratypi, MBM 4528, NY, P, US. Slenderly virgate microphyllous shrubs attaining 2 m, resembUng M. bocainae in habit and small crowded lvs, but the setae of stems and lfstks smooth, proximally less than 1 mm, toward inflorescence longer and finely flagelliform but not reflexed, the lvs at once shorter and simpler, the stipules striate, and the capitula globose.
Stipules triangular-lanceolate 2-3.5 x 0.6-1.5 mm, dorsally glabrous and striately 5-9-nerved, pectinately ciliolate, persistent.
Leaves sessile, the primary pulvinus obsolete, that of each pinna contiguous to stem; rachis of pinnae 6-15 mm, the interfoliolar segments 1-1.5 mm; lfts (6-)8- 13-jug., the blades linear obtuse from auriculate base, those near mid-rachis 4-7(-7.3) x 0.6-0.9 mm, (5.5-)6-9 times as long as wide, the dull olivaceous blades remotely minutely ciliolate but otherwise glabrous, the shallowly concave ventral face veinless, the slender centric midrib prominulous beneath, accompanied on posterior side by a weaker parallel nerve.
Peduncles solitary 8-23 mm, 1-3 times as long as subtending If; capitula without filaments 4-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis either moriform or conelike depending on variable length of bracteal setae; bracts elliptic-oblanceolate 1.4-2.2 x 0.4-0.6 mm, striately 5-nerved, glabrous dorsally, the ascending cilia to 0.6-2 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, many proximal ones staminate; calyx pappiform 1-1.2 mm, the tube almost 0, the setae weak, separate almost or quite to base; coroUa narrowly vase-shaped 2.3-2.5 mm, the ovate cymbiform but scarcely thickened lobes 0.8-1 x 0.45-0.6 mm, minutely gray-pilosulous except for glabrous keel; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 7 mm.
Pods ±3-12 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong-eUiptic, abruptly shortapiculate 12-14 x 4-4.5 mm, 3-4-seeded, the replum to 0.8-1 mm thick, the ripe valves papery, low-convex over each seed, extemaUy densely silky-setose with ascending lustrous setae to 2-3.5 mm, non-septiferous within, separating in one piece from replum and from each other; seeds (few seen) lentiform ±3 x 1.9 mm, the testa either dull brown and fuscous within the pleurogram or fuscous overall.
On arenitic outcrops near 900-1000(-?) m, local along rios Itarare and S. Joao, on landward slope of Sa. do Paranapiacaba in mun. Senges, Castro and Ponta Grossa, within 49°30'-50°W, 24°10'-25°S in e. Parana, BrazU.—R. (IX-)X-III. Mimosa paranapiacabae is notable in its immediate group for the modified leaves, of which the primary pulvinus is suppressed, the short, relatively paucifoliolate pinnae emerging directly from the stem.
It differs from the closely related M. bocainae and M. reduviosa in smooth, never recurved cauline setae and in more numerous nerves of stipules and floral bracts.
The nearly or actually sympatric M. hilariana differs in elliptic-oblanceolate or obovate, not linear leaflets, in campanulate, minutely toothed and ciliolate, not pappiform calyx, and in the weak infrapetiolar aculeus at each node, foreign to all close kindred.
451.
Mimosa hilariana Bameby, sp. nov., habitu virgato, stipulis striatis, foliis parvis sessilibus foliolommque numero M. paranapiacabae manifeste proxima, ab ilia foliolis elliptico-oblanceolatis obovatisve (nec linearibus) ±2.5-4 (nec 5.5-9)-plo longioribus quam latioribus ventre subtiliter 4-5-nervUs (nec enerviis), calycis brevidenticulati (nec pappiformis) ore minute ciliolato, necnon foliomm pulvinis dorso setaculeo debili deflexo vel incurvo calcaratis diversa.—Brazil.
Sao Paulo (vel Parana limitropha): along rio Itarare, 1.1820 (fr), A. de St. Hilaire CV1397bis. - H o - lotypus, P, 2 sheets, one = NY Neg. 11810.
Fig.
25A-D. Wandlike subshrubs ±8-15 dm with simple or distally 2-3-forked, stiffly erect defoliate trunk 2-3 mm diam. and scaly with dry persistent stipules, the homotinous branchlets densely clad with small sessile, forwardly imbricate lvs, the young foliage and stems at once minutely puberulent and pilose with very slender, sinuously flagelliform setae to 1-2 mm (the setae scabrous and deflagellate in age) and armed at each node with a weak inconspicuous retrorse or incurved infrapetiolar setaculeus 0.5-1.3 mm, the subvertically imbricate lfts brown-olivaceous above, a little paler beneath, microscopically puberulent overall and weakly discontinuously setulose-ciliolate, the small, plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary in distal or subterminal If-axils, lateral in fruit.
Stipules erect, ovate or lanceolate 3-7 x 0.7-1.2 mm, striately 5-9-nerved, minutely puberulent dorsally, pectinately setose-ciliate, papery and persistent after fall of If.
Leaf-stalks reduced to a sessile, stipuliform terminal appendage, the pulvini of the one pair of pinnae contiguous to stipules; pinnae narrowly ascending, the rachis 4-15 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.4 mm; lfts 8-12-jug., subequilong, the first pair contiguous to submembranous, subulate or setiform paraphyllidia 0.5-0.9 mm, the ventrally shallow-concave blades elliptic-oblanceolate or -obovate from deeply semicordate base, obtuse at apex, ±3-5.5 X 1.1-2 mm, 2.3-4.1 times as long as wide, finely 5-6-nerved from pulvinule, the subcentric midrib simple or distally 1 -branched, the inner anterior and posterior nerves produced well beyond mid-blade, the outer ones shorter, the venulation of upper face prominulous to tip, of lower face prominulous below mid-blade, thence immersed.
Capitula (seen in fruit only) without filaments ±5 mm diam.; bracts firmly papery oblance-obovate 1.5-2.5 X 0.5-0.8 mm, striately 5-10-nerved, distally incurved and concave, pectinately ciliolate, persistent; flowers (described from marcescent fragments) 4-merous 4-androus; calyx ±0.7 mm, irregularly denticulate ±V3 its length, the orifice minutely ciliolate; corolla turbinate 1.7-2 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave 1-nerved lobes 0.7 x 0.4-0.5 mm, gray-puberulent dorsally; filaments free at base, not seen entire.
Pods 2-5 per capitulum, sessile, in profile broadly elliptic or suborbicular, broadly rounded at each end, 6-12 x 4-6.5 mm, 2-4-seeded, the replum 0.4-1 mm wide, densely hispid with antrorsely ascending flagelliform setae ±1.5 mm, cuspidulate at apex, the papery valves coUiculate over each seed, hispid like the replum but with yet longer setae, when ripe separating in one piece from each other and from the replum but only tardily deciduous, long attached at very base; seeds not seen.
In wet campo or at margin of brejo, ±800- 1000 m, known only from the valleys of rios Itarare and Jaguariaiva, along and near the S. Paulo-Parana boundary within 24°5'-25°S, 49°20'-50'W. - F l . probably in midsummer (XIII); fr. of preceding season persistent on defoliate stems into I, IV. Mimosa hilariana, first collected by St. Hilaire in 1820, then by Dusen in 1915, and rediscovered by Hatschbach in 1973, resembles sympatric M. paranapiacabae in habit, striate stipules, sessile leaves, and number of leaflets per pinna, but is singularly distinct in these features: leaflets elliptic-oblanceolate or -obovate 2.3-4.1 times as long as wide (not linear 5.5-9 times as long as wide); leaflet-blade delicately 4-5-nerved (not nerveless) above, beneath weakly nerved only proximally (not 2-nerved the whole length); calyx denticulate and minutely ciliolate (not pappiform); and a small deflexed or incurved setaculeus at very base of each leaf-pulvinus, a feature found in no related species.
E(ii.29).
Series MIMOSA subseries LANATAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Lanatae Bameby, subser. nov. monotypica subseriebus Pogocephalis vel Ramentaceis dubie affinis, indumento laniformi (partium juniorum rufo), setis caulinis reflexis, et imprimis calyce paleaceo-pappiformi praestans.—Sp. unica: M. lanata Bentham.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Meticulosae *** Vulgares sensu Bentham, 1875:405, minore ex parte (sp. 92, caeteris exclusis).
Unarmed, distantly foliate subshrubs, silky-lanate throughout with gray (when young ferruginous), finely flagelliform setae, those of stem and peduncles retrorse; stipules firm, nerveless extemally; leaf-formula i/26-35; lf-stks less than 1 cm, espiculate; lfts dorsally 2-3-nerved, the larger ones 4-10.5 mm; peduncles solitary, axillary to expanded or early hysteranthous lvs; capitula globose; calyx lustrously paleaceous-pappiform; corolla-lobes antrorsely puberulent; filaments free; fruit a 2-5-seeded craspedium.
Sp.
1, of moist campo of Sa. do Mar in extratropical Brazil (e. S. Paulo to Sta. Catarina).
Mimosa lanata was associated by Bentham with species now construed as unarmed varieties ofM. xanthocentra and therefore referred herein to subser. Pudicae.
The fine silky-lanate, when young rusty indumentum, the retrorse orientation of the cauline setae, and the large paleaceous-pappiform calyx seem quite out of place in that setting, and the ecology and dispersal argue against any close relationship to M. xanthocentra.
In all but the calyx M. lanata agrees fairly well with subser. Pogocephalae, but the lanate members of that group have quite different, valvately dehiscent pods.
I find no obviously close relative anywhere in ser. Mimosa, but a connection with the sympatric subser. Ramentaceae, which differs in retropuberulent flowers, seems plausible.
452.
Mimosa lanata Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 379.
1841.-"BrazU, ^^//a"-Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Benth.)!; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1333; F (fragm. e B)! K (hb. Hook.)! P! M. lanata sensu Bentham, 1875: 405, 1876: 338; Glaziou, 1906: 179; Burkart, 1979: 188 + map (Sta. Catarina).
Slender erect, simply virgate or awkwardly fewbranched, functionally herbaceous, often distantly foliate subshrubs ±1-1.5 m tall, densely softly pubescent throughout with extremely fine flagelliform setae to ±1-2.5 mm, the setae of stems and peduncles retrorsely appressed but with spreading or curly (in age deciduous) tip, those of lf-axes antrorse-spreading, the unfolding lvs and young capitula densely softly orange-brownlanate, the lfts beneath their silky vesture discolorous, darker above, the small globose capitula solitary in the axil of coevally expanding lvs, usually non-pseudoracemose.
Stipules broadly ovate-triangular or broadly lanceolate 2-7 x (1.2-) 1.5-2.5 mm, densely lanate-setulose dorsally, brown glabrous striate within, persistent.
Leafstalks including (or consisting of) hard pulvinus 1.5-7 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 3.5- 5.5(-6.3) cm, the interfoUolar segments 1-2 mm; lfts 26-35-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, in outline narrowly oblong or oblong-elUptic from deeply semicordate base, obliquely apiculate, those near mid-rachis 4-10.5 x 1.4-2.2 mm, 3- 4.7 times as long as wide, dorsally 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib only a little displaced, the inner (or only) posterior nerve produced ± to mid-blade, the venation often concealed by vesture.
Peduncles (1.3-)2-5 cm; capitula without filaments 4.5-7.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis concealed in a silky cloak of fine orange setae; bracts linear-elliptic or-spatulate 1.8-3.3 x 0.3- 0.6 mm, dorsally beyond middle lanate-setulose; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 1.3-1.7 mm, the lobes cleft nearly to base into lustrous setae; corolla narrowly funnelform 2-2.4 mm, the dorsally puberulent, scarcely callous lobes 0.4-0.65 x 0.3- 0.4 mm; filaments pink or lilac, free almost to very base, exserted 4-5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous; ovules 4-5.
Pods± 10-20 per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong ±10-15 X 3-4.5 mm, 2-4(-5)-seeded, the replum 0.5- 0.7 mm wide, short-apiculate, densely hispid along back and sides with stout erect tapering lustrous setae 1-3 mm mixed with shorter fine ascending setulae, the stiffly papery valves concealed by a coat of fine, forwardly appressed setae, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent, rhombic articles ±3 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In moist campo, in brejo, at edge of campo thickets or gallery woodland, and in capoeira, ±700-950 m, discontinuously dispersed from upper rio Itarare near 24°S in s. S. Paulo, Brazil s. through e. Parana, w. of the Atlantic watershed, to the basin of rio Canoas near 27°50'S in s.-e. Sta. Catarina, and disjunctly n.-e. in S. Paulo to Sa. da Bocaina near 22°45'S.-H. (VIII-)XII. E(ii.30).
Series MIMOSA subseries MACROCALYCINAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Macrocalycinae Bameby, subser. nov., habitu, foliomm formula, foliolisque numerosis (24-52- jugis usque) sigmoideis cum subser. Axillaribus congma, sed ab ilia petiolis brevissimis apice spicula paratis coroUisque praeter lobulorum margines minutim antrorsus ciliolatos (nec corolla tota retrorsus argenteo-strigulosa) diversa; a subser. Pedunculosis, petiolo spiculato comparandis, foliolis simul numerosis, marginatis ac sigmoideis et calyce magno paleaceo distincta.—Sp. typica: M. macrocalyx M. Micheli.
Unarmed, diffuse, or sarmentose, slender microphyllous subshrubs and weak shrubs potentially 2-4 m (but flowering when young and shorter), either strigose or hispid-hirsute; stipules 1-3-nerved; leaf-stalks 2 mm or less, spiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the lfts of longer ones 24-52-jug., sigmoidally arched (the tip bent forward), 2.5-5 mm, continuously but very slenderly marginate, l(-3)-nerved dorsally; capitula axillary globose; calyx paleaceous 1.1-1.8 mm; pod a narrow 2- 4-seeded craspedium.
Spp. 2, of the Paraguai basin in s.-e. Paraguay, n.-e. Argentina (Misiones), and s. Brazil (Parana; Rio Grande do Sul).
The relationships of subser. Macrocalycinae run in two directions: on the one hand to sympatric subser. Pedunculosae, similar in spiculate leaf-stalks and antrorsely puberulent or glabrous flowers; and on the other to subser. Axillares, which they resemble very closely in habit, in sigmoid marginate leaflets, and in well-developed calyx.
The Macrocalycinae are introduced in this place in order to emphasize their kinship to Axillares, even though they lack the retrostrigulose floral indumentum that characterizes the latter and the immediately following subseries.
Conspectus of subser. Macrocalycinae Mimosa 453. macrocalyx M. Micheli 454. pedersenii Bameby Key to species of subser. Macrocalycinae I. Setae of stem, peduncles and pods forwardly appressed, straight, smooth, minutely calcarate basally; rachis of longer pinnae 4-6.5 cm 453.
M. macrocalyx (p. 739).
1.
Setae of stems, peduncles and pods erect-incurved, scaberulous, basifixed; rachis of longer pinnae 1.5- 3.5 cm 454.
M. pedersenii (p. 740).
453.
Mimosa macrocalyx M. Micheli, Mem. Soc. Phys.
Geneve 28(7): 54, t. 20.
1883.-"[Paraguay] .
.
. ad rivulos in montibus Pastoreomi prope Villa Rica; Sept., [Balansa] n. 1451."-Holotypus, G!; isotypus, K! M. macrocalyx sensu Burkart, 1948: 172,fig.29.
Slender unarmed, weakly frutescent, leaning or scrambling subshrubs 6-20 dm, the terete reddish-brown stems, lf-axes and subcapillary peduncles strigose with straight, strictly appressed, minutely retro-calcarate, smooth, tapering or flageUiform setae to 1.5-3 mm, the extremely narrow 1 -jug. microphylUdious pinnae bicolored, the incipiently sigmoid and dorsally concave lfts brownish-olivaceous glabrous and sublustrous above, beneath paler pubemlent, continuously but very slenderly caUous-marginate, the small globose capitula solitary in the axil of a series of primary and subsequently of smaller rameal lvs. none pseudoracemose.
Stipules erect, Unearattenuate 3-5.5 X 0.3-0.5 mm, 1-3-nerved, glabrous dorsally, weakly setose-ciliolate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including discolored but littleswollen pulvinus l-1.5(-2) mm, at apex with a very slender spicule less than 1 mm; pinnae 1 -jug.,
the rachis in primary lvs 4-6.5 cm, in rameal lvs (no further described) shorter, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.1 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 30- 52-jug., very gradually decrescent upward from a point below mid-rachis, more abruptly so proximally, the first pair 0.2-0.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.7 mm, the blades narrowly oblong, shaUowly sigmoid (tUde-shaped) from deeply obtusangulate base, at incurved apex obtuse or deltately acute, the longer ones 2.5-4 X 0.6-1.2 mm, 3-4 times as long as wide, aU nerveless above, beneath 2-3-nerved from pulvinule, the very slender unbranched subcentric midribfinelyprominulous, the posterior nerve(s) 740 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 sometimes barely perceptible, the pallid margin ±0.05 mm diam., with a few subfilamentous cilia 0.1-0.4 mm.
Peduncles 20-30 x 0.2 mm; capitula without filaments 3.5-4 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform; bracts ovate or lance-ovate 0.5-0.8 X 0.3-0.5 mm, strongly 1-nerved, distally short-ciliolate, persistent; y/ow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx paleaceous 1.3- 1.5 mm, the lobes united into a cup 0.45-0.6 mm deep, free for 0.8-0.9 mm, shallowly fimbriate-decompound distally; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 1.8-2.1 mm, the discolored, scarcely thickened, shallowly concave lobes triangularovate 0.7-0.8 X 0.4-0.5 mm, keeled dorsally, densely minutely puberulent at the margins, otherwise glabrous; filaments pink, at very base united into an obscure stemonozone, exserted 4-4.5 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous.
Pods 1-3 per capitulum, stipitate, the stipe 1.5-2.5 mm, the body in profile undulately narrow-oblong, including the straight terminal cusp 13-20 x 3 - 3.5 mm, 2-4-seeded, the stramineous replum ±0.4 mm diam., the papery greenish-stramineous valves low-convex over each seed, like the replum thinly or remotely appressed-strigose, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 4-6 mm long; seeds vertically basipetal, in broad profile ±3.5 x 2 mm, the testa smooth but scarcely lustrous, fuscous.
In moist campo thickets at edge of esteros or on stream banks, near 350 m, local on the sources of rio Tebicuari in s.-e. Paraguay, thence s.-e. just into Misiones, Argentina (Loreto), within lat. 25°30'-27°S.-H. IX-III. 454.
Mimosa pedersenii Bameby, sp. nov., hinc M. macrocalyci illinc M. axillari affinis, cum ambabus folioUs subsigmoideis bicoloribus necnon calyce paleaceo-pappiformi congrua, a prima caulium pedunculorum necnon leguminum setis erectis basifixis scaberulis (nec arete appressis, basi subcalcaratis, laevissimis) pinnisque plerisque brevioribus ± 1.5-3.5 (nec 4-6.5) cm usque longis, a secunda, quoad pubem simillima, petiolis omnibus brevissimis 1-2 (nec 3-13) mm longis, calyce pauUo longiori 1.1-1.8 (nec ±1) mm longo, coroUisque apice ad lobulorum marginem parce antrorsus pubemlis (nec totis retrorsus argenteo-strigulosis) diversa.—Brazil.
Rio Grande do Sul: mun. S. Luis Gonzaga, Alfonso Rodrigues, 6.
XI.1977 (fl, fr), T. M. Pedersen 11639.- Holotypus, NY; isotypus, C. M. macrocalyx sensu Chodat & Hassler, 1904: 489 (4601); non M. MicheU.
M. axillaris sensu Burkart, 1948: 169, fig. 28A; non Bentham.
Slender unarmed microphyllidious shrubs and subshrubs, in open stony places matted or trailing and adventitiously rooting, when crowded taller and sarmentose, according to Hassler attaining 4 m but mostly much smaller, the stems and peduncles pilosulous with spreading-ascending basifixed scaberulous setae to 0.7-1.2 mm, the lfts strongly bicolored, dark brown-olivaceous glabrous and lustrous above, beneath paler dull and puberulent, the subglobose capitula solitary in a long succession of If-axils both along the primary homotinous stems and on lateral spurs or branchlets. iS^zpw/^^ 2.5-3 x 0.2 mm, 1-nerved, dorsally puberulent, setulose-ciliolate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including pulvinus 1-2 mm, charged ventrally at apex with a slender spicule less than 1 mm (often concealed by pubescence); pinnae of primary cauline lvs 1.5-3.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-1.2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 24-42-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the blades Unear-oblong a little incurved toward apex (hence shallowly sigmoid), deltately acute, the longer ones (2.7-)3-5.5 x 0.6-1 mm, 4.4-5.6 times as long as wide, nerveless or almost so above, beneath l(-2)-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib displaced proximally but subcentric distally, the posterior nerve, when visible, short and weak, the corneous margin ±0.1 mm diam., ciliolate with widely ascending slender setulae ±0.2-0.7 mm.
Peduncles 2.5-5 cm; capitula without filaments 4.5-5.5 mm diam.; bracts narrowly elliptic 0.7-1.1 x 0.2-0.4 mm, puberulent dorsally and ciliolate, subpersistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, apparently all bisexual; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 1.1-1.8 mm, the brownish tube ±0.5 mm, the lobes usually not deeply decompound; corolla 1.8-2.1 mm, narrowly vase-shaped, the ovate concave, not much thickened lobes 0.5-0.6 x 0.4-0.5 mm, at margin thinly pubemlent with minute forwardly appressed hairs; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 3.5-5 mm.
Pods numerous in a capituliform cluster, in profile elliptic 1-seeded or undulately oblong-elUptic to 4-seeded, cuneately attenuate at base, including a short terminal cusp 6-10 X 3 mm, the replum 0.3 mm wide, the papery valves densely comose with fine erectincurved tapering scabemlous setae to ± 1 mm, not seen fully mature but presumably breaking up into free-falling articles.
In open stony places and about streamside thickets, ±300-500 m, scattered from the lower Parana-Paraguai watershed in depto. Canendiyu, Paraguay s. through the Uruguai basin to Misiones, Argentina and w. Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU (lat. 24°30'-29°S) and e. into centr. Parana (mun. Tibagi).-H. IX-II. The known collections of M. pedersenii have been misidentified either as M. axillaris or M. macrocalyx, between which they are in some respects morphologically intermediate.
The species resembles M. (subser. Axillares) axillaris in loosely spreading-ascending scaberulous setae of stems and peduncles, but differs in uniformly very short petioles, in relatively long calyx, and in corollas only residually puberulent on margin of the lobes with minute, forwardly appressed hairs.
From M. macrocalyx, of which it has the calyx and almost glabrous corolla, M. pedersenii differs markedly in the character of the cauline and peduncular setae, in somewhat shorter pinnae, and in plumper capitula, without filaments 4.5-5 (not 3.5—4) mm in diam. I dedicate this mimosa to Troels Myndel Pedersen, distinguished Danish-Argentine student of Amaranthaceae and the flora of subtropical South America, whose many critically chosen and beautifully prepared specimens of Mimosa have contributed much to my knowledge of the genus.
E(ii.31).
Series MIMOSA subseries REPTANTES Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Reptantes Bameby, subser. nov., a subseriebus flosculomm pube retrorsa congruis praesertim foliolis rectis nunquam dorso tomentellis flosculisque semper capitulatis arte tantum separanda; subseriei species pinnarum et foliolomm numero, foliolomm margine, pedunculorum longitudine, necnon calyce nunc minuto nunc paleaceo-pappiformi inordinatim inter se variant, sed quaeque cum altera vel pluribus manifeste affinis catenam continuam efformare videntur.—Sp. typica: M. reptans Bentham.
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Meticulosae ****Semistrigosae sensu Bentham, 1841: 381, ex parte (spp. 82, 83); ***Vulgares sensu Bentham, 1875: 405 min. ex parte (spp. 98, 100).
M. sect. Eumimosa ser. Pedunculosae *nagellares sensu Bentham, 1841: 370, ex parte (spp. 42, 45, 48, 49, caeteris exclusis); ser. Pedunculosae sensu Bentham, 1875: 399, ex parte (exclus. spp. 55-57, 61, 65-66).
Unarmed herbs and subshrubs, mostly diffuse or humifuse but few erect, the stems either strigose or hispid-hirsute; stipules 1-7-nerved; leafformula variable, the pinnae in all but M. distans subsp. elongata conjugate, in subsp. elongata 2- 8-jug.; spicules 0; lfts mostly 7-24-, in M. distans to 40-jug., the marginal nerve either continuous or not, the larger blades 3.5-21 mm, all (1-)2- 5-nerved; capitula axillary, globose or subglobose, the peduncles either shorter or much longer than the subtending If; calyx paleaceous to pappiform, minute, or subobsolete; corolla retrostrigulose; filaments free; fruit a (1-)2^(-5)- seeded craspedium.
Spp. 8, of planaltine and extratropical Brazil, e. Paraguay, n.-e. Argentina, and Uruguay.
The subseries Reptantes is defined in the first place by retrostrigulose corolla and thereafter by negative criteria: none have either the forwardly curved leaflets, or the dorsally tomentulose leaflets, or the spicate inflorescence which together or singly distinguish the related subser. Axillares, Dryandroideae, Ramentaceae and Dutranae.
Intemally the subseries is diverse in characters that elsewhere rank as significant indicators of consanguinity: leaf-formula, venation and marginal nerve of leaflets, and especially the calyx, which varies from paleaceous to almost obsolete.
The group is formed by concatenation, each element of the chain being closely linked to the next, although the terminal links are quite dissimilar.
Most remarkable is the variation found in M. distans sensu lato, where the number of pinnae, stabilized at exactly one pair in most other members of ser. Mimosa, rises erratically from one to eight pairs.
Outside subser. Reptantes and subseries just enumerated, retrostrigulose corollas have been observed only in two members of subser. Ramosissimae, very different in being armed and shmbby, and in the wandlike M. (Brevipedes) fernandez-casasii, distinguished by densely foliate lower stem and long exserted pseudoraceme.
Conspectus of subser. Reptantes Mimosa * Pinnae exactly conjugate; lf-stks l-8(-10) mm; extratropical Brazil, n.-e. Argentina, Paraguay, in Brazil extending weakly n. into w. Minas Gerais. t Lfts strongly conUnuously marginate; peduncles 3-16 cm; calyx paleaceous-pappiform not over V s as long as corolla; far s. Brazil and Uruguay.
455. reptans Bentham 456. schleidenii Herter t t Lfts weakly marginate; peduncles 3-6.5 cm; calyx paleaceous and ± half as long as corolla; upland s. Brazil.
457. fachinalensis Burkart t t t Lfts continuously marginate; peduncles 6-12 mm; calyx minute.
458. luciana Bameby t t t t Lfts discontinuously marginate; peduncles 12-23 mm; calyx very small but pappiform (0.4-0.7 mm); w. Minas Gerais.
459. humifusa Bentham ** Pinnae exactly conjugate; lf-stks (5-)7-30(-70) mm, some more than 10 mm; largely extratropical, extending n. to e. Paraguay and in Brazil to Mato Grosso do Sul and w. Minas Gerais.
460. paupera Bentham a. var. paupera b. var. dives Bameby *** Pinnae 1-several-jug.; lf-stks 1.5-65 mm; lfts subdimidiate by strong displacement of midrib and continuously strongly marginate; calyx always minute (0.25 mm or less); intertropical or almost so, widespread over planaltine Brazil, one variety of M. distans in Paraguay.
461. falcipinna Bentham 462. distans Bentham I. subsp. distans a. var. distans h. var. neuroloma (Bentham) Bameby II. subsp. elongata (Bentham) Bameby a. var. elongata h. var. planaltinae Bameby c. var. paraguariensis Bameby d. var. quadripinna Bameby e. var. terezinae Bameby Key to species of subser. Reptantes 1.
Pinnae 1-8-jug., but at least 2 pairs in some lvs 462/11.
M. distans subsp. elongata (p. 752).
1.
Pinnae exactly one pair in all lvs.
2.
Lfts obUquely lanceolate or semi-ovate, broadest near base, and coarsely costate dorsally, the strongly displaced or submarginal midrib dividing blade 1:2.5-5.
3.
Stems mostly stiff and seldom humifuse, hispid with setae 1-3 mm; widespread over the BrazUian Planalto 462/1.
M. distans subsp. distans (p. 751).
3.
Stems flexuously humifuse, hirsute with setae 3-5 mm; local in s. Goias, Distrito Federal, and adj. Minas Gerais 461.
M. falcipinna (p. 748).
2.
Lfts linear or narrowly to broadly oblong-eUiptic, little or not oblique beyond asymmetric base, broadest near middle, and the midrib never so much displaced.
4.
Longer lf-stks 7-45 mm, some of any plant over 1 cm.
5.
Setae of stems 3-5 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 3-7(-8) cm; lfts of longer pinnae 14-23-jug.; found at 700-1050 m on the BrazUian Planalto in Distrito Federal and adj. Goias and Minas Gerais 461.
M falcipinna (p. 748).
5.
Setae of stems 1-2.5 mm; rachis of longer pinnae 0.7^.5 cm; lfts of longer pinnae (4-)6-l 5(- 19)-jug.; found below 500 m in lat. 20*'-31°S w. of long. 51°, mostly extratropical but extending feebly n. into centr. Mato Grosso do Sul and adj. Paraguay, and far w. Minas Gerais 460.
M. paupera (p. 747).
Longer lf-stks l-8(-10) mm.
6.
Lfts continuously pallid-marginate; extratropical Brazil and Uruguay.
7.
Calyx paleaceous ± 1.8 mm, nearly half as long as corolla; lfts 3-nerved, one posterior and one anterior nerve subequally developed; capitula prior to anthesis hispid with emergent bracteal ciUa 457.
M. fachinalensis (p. 745).
7.
Calyx less than 1 mm and not over V s as long as corolla; lfts lacking a strong anterior primary nerve.
8.
Peduncles 30-160 mm; calyx including cilia 0.6-1 mm.
9.
Larger lfts 6-11 x 2-4 mm, along pinna-rachis at intervals of 1.5-3.5 mm 456.
M. schleidenii (p. 744).
9.
Larger lfts 2-5.5 x 0.5-1.5 mm, along pinna-rachis at intervals of 0.3-1.5 mm.
.
455.
M. reptans (p. 743).
8.
Peduncles 6-22 mm; calyx including cilia less than 0.5 mm. .. 458.
M. luciana (p. 745).
6.
Lfts discontinuously setose-ciliate; Triangulo of w. Minas Gerais. .. 459.
M. humifusa (p. 746).
455.
Mimosa reptans Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 372.
1841.-"Near Maldonado [Umguay], Tweedie; Brazil, iS^Z/o."—Lectotypus, Tweedie 26, "found on point de Bollina [Ballena] near Maldonado," K (hb. Hook.)!; syntypi, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Benth. & hb. Hook.)!; probable syntypi, Sello d.331, +B = F Neg. 1364\ Sello s.n.,
P(hb. Gaudichaud.
1467)\ M. reptans sensu Bentham, 1875: 400, 1876: 326.
Slender unarmed, diffuse or prostrate, microphyllidious shrublets with flagelliform or stoloniform, often adventitiously rooting primary stems 4-10 dm giving rise from axils of well-spaced primary lvs to more densely foliate spurs or branchlets, the stems and long axillary peduncles both puberulent and pilosulous with microscopically scaberulous tapering setae to 1-2.5 mm, the setae of stem and lf-axes ascending, those between mid-peduncle and capitulum ± sharply deflexed (but terete, basifixed), the foliage brownolivaceous, the firm lfts a little darker above than beneath but not conspicuously lustrous, facially glabrous or the lower ones thinly puberulent dorsally, all finely callous-marginate and setose-ciliolate, the globose or plumply ellipsoid capitula on subvertically ascending peduncle 2-several times as long as associated If.
Stipules erect, narrowly lance-attenuate 2.5-6 x 0.4-0.6 mm, strongly 1 -nerved persistent.
Leaf-stalks including livid pulvinus 1-4 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 14-28 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.3-1.3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 14- 20-jug., decrescent at each end of rachis, the smaU (often unequal) first pair 0.3-1 mm distant from Unear-subulate paraphyUidia 0.4-1.2 mm, the blades linear to narrowly oblong-elUptic in outline, auriculate at base and either obtuse or deltately acute at apex, those near mid-rachis 2-5 (-5.5) X 0.5-1.5 mm, 3.3-5.5 times as long as wide, all veinless above or almost so, beneath 2-nerved from pulvinule, the simple, slightly displaced midrib either straight or a trifle bent forward distally, the posterior nerve weak, expiring near or short of mid-blade, the corneous margin 0.05-0.1 mm diam., the weak cilia 0.2-1 mm.
Peduncles (2.5-)3-9 cm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam.; bracts narrowly elliptic 0.7-1.2 X 0.2-0.3 mm, puberulent and ciliolate, 1-nerved, persistent;yZow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, usually all bisexual; calyx subpaleaceous 0.6-0.8 mm, the campanulate tube 0.25-0.3 mm, the lobes irregularly decompound into few well-separated setae; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 1.6- 2.5 mm, finely retrostrigulose from near base upward, the concave but scarcely thickened lobes 0.5-0.7 X 0.4-0.5 mm, charged distally with a few small antrorse hairs; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 3-4 mm.
Pods usually several per capitulum in a loose cluster, cryptically cuneatestipitate, in profile undulately linear or Unearoblong 9-19 X ±4 mm, 2-4-seeded, the constricted replum 0.3-0.6 mm wide, the papery valves low-convex over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely puberulent and comose with ascending-incurved tapering stramineous setae ± 1-2.5 mm, the ripe valves separating into free-falling articles 5-6.5 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
In unrecorded habitats, to be expected in open stony places at low elevations, known from scattered stations along the coast and inland from n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil to s. Umguay, in lat. 28°30'-35°S.-n. IX-XI(-?).
In general organization and most structural details M. reptans resembles sympatric M. schleidenii, but differs decisively in much smaller and more crowded leaflets.
These are sometimes obscurely bent forward toward the apex, suggesting an affinity to the closely related subser. Axillares, which differ technically in firm, extemally nerveless stipules.
456.
Mimosa schleidenii Herter, Revista Sudamer.
Bot. 7(6-8): 208.
1943 (seen in Microfiche 149/28), based on M. marginata Lindley, Edward's Bot. Reg.
24: Misc.
Notices 82.1838, hom. illeg.—Described from plants cultivated in England, of unknown provenance, but doubtless derived, Uke the next foUowing, from Sello via Berlin; non M. marginata Lamarck, 1783.-"M. marginata, Bot. Reg.
1838" at K! is doubtless authentic—M. lindleyi Burkart, Darwiniana 7: 219.
1946, nom. superfl. M. prostrata [Schleiden & Vogel, Nov. Actorum Acad. Caes.
Leop.-Carol.
Nat. Cur.
19(pars posterior): 70.
1842, nom. nud.] Regel, Trudy Imp.
S.-Petersburgsk.
Bot. Sada 3(1): 117.
1874, hom. illeg.; non M. prostrata Lamarck, 1783.—Described from plants cultivated at St. Petersburg under the name M. prostrata hort.,
the stock doubtless acquired from Berlin and ultimately derived from seeds collected by Sello in extratropical Brazil or Uruguay.
When Herter proposed the epithet schleidenii to replace preoccupied prostrata Schleiden & Vogel, he knew this only as a nomen nudum, incapable of generating a new name.
Mimosa schleidenii consequently replaced M. marginata Lindley, of which Herter cited the protologue.—Equated with M. marginata by Bentham, 1875: 647.
M. marginata sensu Bentham, 1841: 371, 1846: 86, 1875: 400, 1876: 324; Malme, 1931: 13.
M. schleidenii sensu Burkart, 1979: 222.
Prostrate subshrubs with distantly branched livid stems, randomly radicant from nodes, the young stems, lf-axes and margin of most lfts hirsute with fine tapering, rufescent-stramineous, smooth or microscopically scaberulous spreading or ascending setae 1.5-4 mm, the firm, broadly continuously callous-marginate lfts bicolored, when dry dove-gray above, brownish beneath, the dense globose capitula solitary in a long succession of If-axils on elongate, subverticaUy assurgent peduncles.
Stipules firm erect lanceolate 2.5-6 X 1-1.5 mm, 1-2-nerved dorsally, persistent.
Leaf-stalks of primary cauline lvs 2-8(-10) mm, at middle 0.4-0.8 mm diam., the terminal appendage stipuliform, the ventral sulcus broad shallow, deltately bridged at apex; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 2-6(-8) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 2-3.5 mm; lfts in primary cauline lvs ll-17(-19)-jug., in lvs of axillary branchlets sometimes fewer (no further described), decrescent at each end of rachis, the first, strongly unequal pair 0.8-1.5 mm distant from linear ascending paraphyllidia 0.7-1.3 mm, the blades eUiptic-oblong from deeply semicordate base, obtuse or obscurely apiculate, straight or slightly arched forward, those near mid-rachis 6-11 x 2-4 mm, ±2.6-3 times as long as wide, the corneous pallid rim 0.2-0.3 mm diam., the blades all veinless above, beneath faintly 3-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib simple or weakly 1-3- branched on each side, the inner posterior nerve brochidodrome beyond mid-blade, the outer one very short or almost obsolete.
Peduncles (3-)5- 16 cm; capitula without filaments 7-8 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the 4-ribbed obtuse fl-buds densely silvery-strigose with retrorse hairs; bracts linear-spatulate 1.2-1.5 mm, subpersistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, all (or most) bisexual; calyx pappiform 0.8-1 mm, the brown, extemally glabrous tube cupuliform 0.2-0.35 mm, the fine erect cilia to 0.6-0.7 mm; corolla subtubular 2.6-2.9 mm, the erect navicular lobes 1-1.2 X 0.5-0.6 mm; filaments pink-purple, free to base, exserted 3.5^.5 mm.
Pods several per capitulum subsessile, in profile Unear-oblong (7-)10-19 X 4.5 mm, (I-)2-4-seeded, the slightly undulate replum and almost flat valves subequally silky-hispid overall with stramineous flageUiform setae 1.5-3 mm, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles as long as or a little longer than wide.
On granite morros and in open stony campo below 300 m, local on e. slope of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil (Porto Alegre; Ca5apava) and s.-e. Umguay, in lat. 30°-35°S.—R. X-I.-Cultivated under glass in European botanical gardens in midXIX century.
Mimosa schleidenii is notable in its group for pliantly prostrate stems, relatively large, boldly pallid-marginate leaflets, and long assurgent or vertically erect peduncles.
Its indumentum of loosely spreading sordid setae varies greatly from plant to plant and even in one plant between lower glabrate stems to densely msty-pilose new branchlets, young leaf-stalks, and peduncles.
457.
Mimosa fachinalensis Burkart in Reitz, Fl. ilustr. catarin.
LEGU/I: 219, est. 35.
1979.- "Santa Catarina: Praia Grande (antes Turvo), Taimbezinho, 900 m, campo, P. R. Reitz C 1550 (15.02.1946)."-Holotypus, SI (not seen); paratypus, Rambo 49377, F! = NY Neg. 11896, sub nom. nud. "M. supina Bameby."
Prostrate unarmed subshrubs with pliantly humifuse stems 3-4(-?) dm, branched near ground and distally simple, the stems, lf-axes and peduncles hispid with slender erect smooth brown tapering setae to 2-4.5 mm and in addition minutely puberulent, the continuously marginate lfts facially glabrous, setose-ciliate, the globose hispid-setose capitula solitary on erect-ascending peduncle longer than the subtending If Stipules erect, lance-ovate or deltate (2-)2.5-4.5(-5.5) x 0.7-2.4 mm, glabrous and mostly 3-nerved dorsally, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including livid pulvinus 1.5-4.5 x 0.4-0.5 mm, obscurely sulcate, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the recurved rachis 15-33 mm, the longer interfoUolar segments 0.5-1.3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 15-22(-24)-jug., the first pair 0.4-1.5 mm distant from ascending, subulate or sometimes subfoliose paraphyllidia, the blades oblong-oblanceolate from oblique but non-auriculate base, obtuse, the longer ones ±4-5 x 1.3-2 mm, all 3 - 4-nerved from pulvinule, the slightly displaced midrib anastomosing on each side just below blade apex with one anterior and one posterior primary nerve, the outer posterior nerve, when present, weak and short, the venation slenderly prominulous on both faces of blade, the pallid marginal nerve ±0.05 mm diam., the erect cilia 0.5-2 mm.
Peduncles 3-6.5 cm; capitula without bracteal setae or filaments ±7 mm diam., prior to anthesis hispid, the obtuse fl-buds retrostrigulose; bracts linear (1-)2-2.5 mm, 1-nerved, hispid-ciliate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx paleaceous 1.5-1.8 mm, the four lobes united through about half their length, thence deeply decompound into setiform divisions; corolla subtubular 2.6-3.3 mm, the erect, shallowly concave, extemally carinate and retrostrigulose lobes 0.8-1 x 0.5 mm; filaments (presumably pink) united through ±0.3 mm below the ovary, exserted 4 mm.
Pods sessile, in profile oblong obtuse ±12-16 x 5-6 mm, 3-4-seeded, the almost straight replum ±0.6 mm diam., the papery brown valves low-convex over each seed, the replum and valves alike hispid overall with erect tapering setae 1-2 mm, otherwise glabrous, the ripe valves breaking up into free-falling, individually dehiscent articles 3-4 mm long; ripe seeds not seen.
Prostrate in stony places near 900 m in the zone of matinha nebular, local on the e. and s. slopes of Sa.
Geral in lat. 29°-29°30'S, in extreme s.-e. Sta. Catarina and adj. Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU.-H. XII-II(-?).
Burkart likened M. fachinalensis to M. falcipinna, from which it differs most obviously in venation of leaflets, in amply paleaceous calyx, and in moist extratropical montane habitat.
From habitally similar and more nearly sympatric M. reptans it may be distinguished by three-, not one-nerved stipules, slenderly callous-marginate, three-, not two-nerved leaflets, peduncles retropilose below the capitulum, enlarged calyx, and ecology.
458.
Mimosa luciana Bameby, sp. nov., notulis multis cum affini M. schleidenii affinis, sed ab ea foliis foliolisque parvis, his 0.7-1.5 (nec 2- 3) mm latis tenuius marginatis pedunculisque abbreviatis 6-12 mm (nec 3-16 cm) longis primo intuitu diversa.—Uruguay.
Canelones (or Rorida): Sta. Lucia, 31.1.1875 (ff, frjun), Fruchards.n. —Holotypus, P = NY Neg. 11805. — Ibid.,
bois de Sta. Lucia, 1.
XI. 1869 (fl), Fruchard s.n. —Paratypus, P. Slender, stiffly branched unarmed microphyllidious shrub of unknown stature, the terete purplish-brown branchlets, lf-axes and peduncles thinly hispidulous with spreading-ascending setae to ± 1 mm, the firm brown-olivaceous lfts glaucescent on upper face, glabrous on both, finely continuously callous-marginate and weakly remotely setose-ciliolate, the globose capitula solitary on short peduncle in If-axils toward end of branchlets or subterminal to axiUary short-shoots, the peduncle shorter than subtending If Stipules erect firm, lanceolate 2-4 x 0.6-1.2 mm, mostly 3-nerved from base, glabrous facially, thinly setulose-ciliolate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including pulvinus 1-1.5 X 0.3-0.6 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 8-22 mm, the interfoUolar segments 0.3- 1.1 mm; lfts of major lvs 10-18-jug., of some diminished lvs of brachyblasts (no further described) only 7-10-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the small first pair arising 0.2-0.5 mm distant from ascending subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.6 mm, the blades oblong from obtusely auriculate base, deltately subacute, the longer ones 2.5-4.8 x 0.7-1.5 mm, 3-3.6 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, 2-nerved beneath, the scarcely prominulous midrib and the posterior nerve subequidistant from pallid marginal nerve ±0.1 mm wide, the posterior nerve expiring beyond mid-blade.
Peduncles 6- 12 mm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the 4-angulate obtuse ff-buds thinly gray-puberulent; bracts 1-1.7 x 0.3-0.7 mm, 1-nerved, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, all bisexual; calyx campanulate 0.2-0.25 mm, the obscurely lobulate rim ciliolate with setulae 0.1-0.2 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2-2.3 mm, the tube thinly retrostrigulose, the ovate, weakly 1 -nerved, shallowly concave lobes a little thickened distally, puberulent extemally with antrorse-spreading hairs; filaments (presumably pink) obscurely united at very base into a stemonozone at base of ovary stipe, exserted ±4 mm.
Pods (not seen fully ripe) numerous in dense clusters, subsessile, in profile narrowly oblong 2-seeded or elliptic 1-seeded, including terminal cusp 9-14 x 4 mm, the replum 0.5 mm wide, shallowly constricted when two ovules mature, the valves coUiculate over each seed and like the replum strigose with narrowly ascending setae ±1-1.5 mm, apparently separating into free-falling articles.
In unrecorded habitat, probably near or below 100 m, known only from the type-locality in s. Umguay.—Fl.
XI-II. Mimosa luciana differs from all other Reptantes in stiffly branched stems, small short leaves, and shortly pedunculate capitula, consequently in general habit and appearance.
In firm-textured, strongly marginate leaflets it resembles sympatric M. schleidenii, but the corolla is retrostrigulose only below the lobes, which are loosely antrorse-pubemlent.
While I have no doubt about its status as a distinct species, the affinities ofM. luciana may require reassessment as more is learned about its habitat, dispersal, and possible origin through introgression between M. schleidenii and some other group of ser. Mimosa.
459.
Mimosa humifusa Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 406.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 342, descr. ampliat.
1876.—"Habitat ad Uberaba, provinciae S. Paulo [w. Minas Gerais]: RegneU coU.
Ill, n. 499*."-Holotypus, collected 16.
X. 1849 (fl, frjun), K!; isotypus, S! = NY Neg. 11842.
Diminutive unarmed microphyllidious, prostrate or weakly assurgent, functionally herbaceous subshrub with numerous simple or fewbranched, densely foliate stems 1-2.5 dm from a short caudex surmounting a thick woody root, coarsely hispidulous almost throughout with straight ascending, or spreading and flageUately deor in-curved setae to ± 1-2.5 mm, the brownolivaceous lifts glabrous dark above, paler and (all or at least the proximal ones) thinly strigosesetose beneath, discontinuously setose-ciliate, the small subglobose capitula single from a few distal If-axils, at least at maturity elevated above subtending If, none pseudoracemose.
Stipules erect firm, lance-attenuate 2-4 x 0.4-0.7 mm, dorsally glabrate 3-nerved, setulose-ciliolate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks including small livid pulvinus 2-5 X 0.25-0.45 mm, openly shallow-sulcate, espiciUate; pinnae I -jug.,
the rachis (5-)6-l 3 mm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.5-0.8 mm; lfts (6-)7-12-jug., decrescent toward each end of rachis, the first pair 0.3-0.6 mm distant from Unear-subulate livid paraphyllidia 0.4-0.8 mm, the blades linear or narrowly oblong-elUptic from bluntly auriculate base, apiculate, straight or slightly arched forward, those at mid-rachis 3.5- 5.5 X 0.7-1.4(-l.6) mm, 3.2-5.6 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath weakly costate by simple midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, but 1-2 faint short posterior nerves sometimes just perceptible.
Peduncles 12-23 mm, densely hispid distally; capitula without filaments ±5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but hispidulous with shortly emergent bracteal setae, the 4-carinate fl-buds retrorsely gray-setulose; receptacle setose; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1-1.4 mm, in profile 0.15-0.2 mm wide, glabrous and carinate dorsally, setose-ciliolate below apex, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx pappiform 0.4-0.7 mm, the glabrous or extemally puberulent tube 0.1-0.15 mm, the orifice densely finely ciliolate with setulae to 0.3-0.6 mm; corolla subtubular 1.4-2.2 mm, retrorsely gray-strigulose from base upward, the cymbiform incurved lobes 0.5-0.7 x 0.3-0.45 mm; filaments free at base, not seen entire.
Pods (incompletely known) sessile, in profile undulately narrow-oblong ±9-12 x 4 mm, the shallowly constricted replum ±0.4 mm wide, contracted distally into an erect cusp ±2 mm, setose on back and sides with erect tapering setae to 1- 2.5 mm, the papery valves retrorsely strigose, the presumably free-faUing articles 4-4.5 mm long (not seen fully ripe); seeds unknown.
In stony campo at ±700-800 m, known only from the vicinity of Uberaba, near 20°S, 48°W in w. Minas Gerais, BrazU.-H. X-XI(-?).
This poorly known inconspicuous mimosa was appended by Bentham to his series Meticulosae subdivision Vulgares, remote from what I conjecture to be a nearer ally, M. paupera, which was assigned to ser. Pedunculosae.
It resembles M. paupera in stature, but is more densely leafy, and has rather similar, though smaller, pinnae, of elliptic outline when fully expanded.
The retrostrigulose flower is that of other Reptantes, but the calyx is shortly pappiform rather than minute.
The morphological syndrome is not really convincing evidence of relationship to Reptantes, but I can find no group more receptive.
460.
Mimosa paupera Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 372.
1841.—Typus infra sub var. paupera indicatur.
Slender unarmed perennial herbs with several simple terete, procumbent or humifuse stems 1- 5(-7) dm from a branched subterranean caudex surmounting a fusiform or massive cylindric woody root, the stems, lf-axes and peduncles variably but usually only thinly hispid-setose with spreading-ascending or strigose with forwardly appressed, straight tapering or at tip flexuously flagelliform setae to 1-2.5 mm, sometimes in addition minutely puberulent, less often subglabrous, the sparse, very sensitive foliage olivaceous subconcolorous, the firm plane lfts often thinly pilosulous dorsally on side posterior to stout midrib and also exceptionally so ventrally, the proximal pairs very often in addition dorsally appressed-setose, the ellipsoid or subglobose capitula all axillary, none pseudoracemose.
Stipulesfirmerect, lanceolate 3-7(-8) x 0.6-1.1 mm, striately 3-5-nerved, dorsally glabrous or puberulent, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leafstalks (5-)7- 30 mm, or of some lower lvs to 5-7 cm, at middle 0.5-0.8 mm diam., shallowly openly sulcate ventrally, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., ascending in wide V from tip of petiole, the rachis of longer ones 7-45 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.9-5.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 6-15(-19)-, rarely only 4- 6-jug., conspicuously decrescent both upand downward from a point near mid-rachis, the first pair 0.4-1.5 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.7-2.7 mm, the blades oblong-elUptic or obliquely oblanceolate from broadly shallowly semicordate base, abruptly apiculate or obtuse mucronulate, those near mid-rachis 7-21 x 1.5- 6 mm, 3-4.6(-5.3) times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 3^-nerved from pulvinule, the strong simple midrib displaced to divide blade 1:3-5, the more slender inner posterior nerve expiring beyond mid-blade, the outer 1-2 nerves short and weak.
Peduncles all solitary or some in distal axils geminate, mostly 3-8(-9) cm but some late ones at times shorter; capitula without filaments 4.5-6.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid, 4-keeled fl-buds silveryretrostrigulose; bracts linear or linear-oblanceolate 0.8-2 X 0.2-0.4 mm, glabrous and 1-carinate dorsally, shortly setose-ciliolate distally; flowers 4-merous, the bisexual ones 4-androus and some small lower staminate ones 8-androus, at least in some capitula; calyx submembranous 0.1-0.2 mm, the rim glabrous or minutely ciliolate, the fine weak hairs not over 0.3 mm; corolla narrowly funnelform or subcylindric (the short proximal ones sometimes turbinate) 1.6- 2.6 mm, retrostrigulose almost or quite to base, the ovate, scarcely thickened 1-nerved concave lobes 0.5-0.75 mm; filaments pink-lilac, obscurely united at very base, exserted (4-)4.5-6.5 mm.
Pods (not well known) ±5-20 per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong ±10-16 X 3-4 mm, abruptly apiculate, the shallowly constricted replum 0.3-0.4 mm diam., hispid along back and sides with ascending smooth setae 1-1.5 mm, the papery valves coarsely retrostrigulose with somewhat shorter comma-shaped setulae not concealing the face of valves, these low-colliculate over each of 2—4(-5) seeds, when ripe breaking up into free-falling, rhombic-elliptic articles ±3-3.5 mm long. In the context of subser. Reptantes a syndrome of generally diffuse stems, slender petioles, con- 748 MEMOIRS OF THE N E W YORK BOTANICAL GARDEN [VOL.
65 jugate and short, relatively few-foliolate pinnae characterizes this variable yet seldom misidentified species.
The leaflets of each pinna are nearly always much diminished both up and downward from near mid-rachis, forming when fully displayed a composite blade of elliptic outline.
Key to varieties ofM. paupera 1.
Lvs relatively small, the larger lfts 7-11(-12) x 1.5-3 mm; widespread in campo habitats throughout the range of the species 460a. var. paupera (p. 748).
1.
Lvs relatively ample, the larger lfts 11-21 x 3- 6 mm; local on calcareous substrates and at gallery-margins in n.-centr. Paraguay and w. Mato Grosso do Sul, BrazU. .. 460b. var. dives (p. 748).
460a. Mimosa paupera Bentham var. paupera.
M. paupera Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens, str.— "Brazil, Sello.'\ collected perhaps, according to Malme (1931: 13), near Alegrete in w. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.—Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Hook.,
herb.
Benth.,
mounted together)!; presumed isotypi, Sello d.l061, +B = F Neg. 1353\ Sello s.n.,
G! M. paupera var. longepedunculata Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 548 (=P1. hassler.
404).
1904.—"[Paraguay.] ... in campo pr. Curuguaty, Sept. [Hassler] n. 4603 .. . pr. Igatimi, Sept., n. 4755; in campo Yeruti, Dec, n. 5801."—Lectotypus, Hassler 4603, G!; isolectotypi, K! NY!; syntypi, Hassler 4755, G! Hassler 5801, G! M. paupera sensu Bentham, 1875: 401; 1876: 327; Burkart, 1948: 163 (+ antecedent bibliography), fig. 28P; 1987: 503,fig.205.
As described in key to varieties.
In campo, on sandy, fine clayey or loose stony substrates, ±50-350(-?) m, interruptedly widespread from valley of rio Aquidauana in s.-centr. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil s. through s.-e. Paraguay and n.-e. Argentina (Misiones, Corrientes, Entre Rios) to the valley of rio Quatai in n. Uruguay and adj. w. Rio Grande do Sul, weakly e. in Brazil to the Paranaiba valley in far w. Minas Gerais and to s.-centr. Parana (Guarapuava).— H. (IX-)X-III(-V).
The plants distinguished as var. longepedunculata seem to be inconsiderable variants.
460b. Mimosa paupera var. dives Bameby, var. nov., a var. paupera foliolis conspicue ampliatis inter se distantius 3.5-5.5 (nec 1-2.5) mm usque semotis, majoribus (11-) 12-21 x 3-6 (nec 7-12 x 1.5-3) mm dissimilis.—Paraguay.
Concepcion: Estancia Sta. Maria, 2.
II.1896 (fl), /.
D. Anisits 2657.-Holotypus, S = NYNeg.
11851.
As described in key to varieties.
In unknown microhabitats, reported from limestone substrates and from gallery margin, at unrecorded elevations, apparently local in the valley of rio Apa in n.-centr. Paraguay and in adj. Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil.-Fl.
II-III. 461.
Mimosa falcipinna Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 371.
1841.-"Brazil, Pohr\ the locality expanded in Martius, ¥1. bras. 15(2): 325.
1876 to: "in provincia Goyaz ad Serra dos Christaes."
—Holotypus, Pohl d.l468 = 719, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1806; isotypi, +B = F Neg. 1319\ K (hb. Benth.)! NY! W! M. falcipinna sensu Bentham, 1875: 400.
Functionally herbaceous subshrub from xylopodium and a carrot-shaped woody root, the simple terete stems flexuously procumbent or humifuse (1-)2^.5(-6) dm, these together with lf-axes, Ift-margins and peduncles hispid with erect, tapering or flagelliform, commonly sordid or rufescent setae to 3-5 mm mixed with minute puberulence and scattered discolored granular trichomes, the firm plane, dorsally thickly paUidmarginate lfts olivaceous glabrous above, beneath pallid or subglaucous and often thinly setose, the plumply ovoid or subglobose capitula solitary or (distally) 2-3-nate in all axils upward from near mid-stem on subvertical peduncle much longer than subtending lf-stk but either longer or shorter than the whole If Stipules erect firm, lanceolate (4-)5-10 x 0.7-1.7 mm, coarsely (3-)5-nerved, either glabrous or setose dorsally, setose-ciliate, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 1.5- 4.5 cm (those near mid-stem often longest), at middle (0.4-)0.5-0.9 mm diam., rounded dorsally, coarsely 2-ridged ventrally, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., their straight or gently retro-arcuate rachis 3-7(-8) cm, the interfoliolar segments 2- 4.5 mm; lfts 14-23- (of some depauperate early lvs only 9-15-, no further described)-jug., gradually decrescent upward, abruptly so proximally, the first, often unequal pair 1-2.5 mm distant from lance-subulate paraphyllidia (0.7-)l-2 mm, all in outline very obliquely lanceolate or lanceoblong from broadly obtusangulate base, obtuse apiculate, those near mid-rachis (9.5-) 10-15.5 X 2.5-4.3(-4.5) mm, (2.9-)3-4.5(-4.8) times as long as wide, all smooth above, beneath (3-)4- 5-nerved from broad short pulvinule, the thick paUid midrib strongly displaced at base of blade but subcentric toward apex, the posterior nerves progressively weaker and shorter outward, the innermost one confluent with the pallid margin near or beyond mid-blade, the outer ones much shorter.
Peduncles laterally compressed 3-9 cm; capitula without filaments or bracteal setae 6- 7.5(-8) mm diam., prior to anthesis submoriform but usually hispid with shortly emergent setae; bracts linear or linear-oblanceolate 1.3-3 X 0.3-0.5 mm, prominently pallid-keeled, charged on each margin above middle with 2-A widely ascending setae to 1-2 mm, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some or many proximal ones staminate; calyx a membranous collar 0.1-0.15 mm tall, the undulate margin glabrous or with a few minute setulae not over 0.15 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.4-3.2 mm, the concave lobes (0.5-)0.6-0.8 x 0.5-0.7 mm, dorsally pallid-carinate, on each side of keel retrorsely strigulose; filaments pink, weakly monadelphous about base of glabrous ovary, exserted 6-8 mm.
Pods commonly 2-10 per capitulum, cryptically stipitate, the body in profile undulately narrow-oblong straight 14-18 X 4-4.5 mm, 3-4-seeded, the constricted replum 0.4-0.5 mm diam., contracted at apex into a short subulate cusp, densely or thinly hispidulous with erect or subretrorse, basally thickened setae 0.5-1 mm, the papery brown valves either glabrous or remotely retro-strigulose, breaking up when ripe into biconvex, free-falling articles 4-5 mm long; seeds (Irwin 26093, NY) plumply lentiform ±3.5 X 2.7 mm, the smooth testa reddish-brown sublustrous.
In campo sujo and open cerrado, on crystalline rock-sands and laterite, 700-1050 m, resistant to fire, locally plentiful on upper rios Commba, S. Bartolomeu and S. Marcos in s.-e. Goias and Distrito Federal, thence extending e. across Sa. da Tiririca just into adj. Minas Gerais, BrazU.— H. late X-III. Mimosa falcipinna is closely related to M. distans var. distans, and precariously distinguished at the specific level by weak, humifuse stems and by the indumentum of extremely long subvertical setae of stems, leaf-stalks and peduncles.
462.
Mimosa distans Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 382.
1841.—Typus infra sub var. distanti indicatur.
Unarmed subshrubs and suffruticose herbs (1.5-)3-11 (-15) dm, the commonly stiff but slender, either erect or incurved-assurgent, but at times pliantly prostrate, either simple or distantly few-branched stems (1-) 1.5-4 mm diam. and often glabrescent proximally, upward openly or remotely, less often densely foliate and, like lf-stks and peduncles, either strigose or hispid with tapering, sometimes ffagelliform setae to 1- 3 mm, these forwardly appressed to spreading, loosely deffexed, or retrorse, the dull or sublustrous olivaceous foliage subconcolorous, the firm or subcoriaceous lfts glabrous on upper face, beneath usually finely, thinly, or remotely villosulous (especially on side posterior to midrib) but sometimes quite glabrous, the proximal ones commonly setose dorsally, all either finely or grossly setose-marginate, the peduncles all or mostly axillary to distal lvs or some forming an efoliate pseudoraceme exserted to 1 dm beyond foliage.
Stipules firm, lanceolate or lance-ovate 3-9 X (0.5-)0.75-2 mm, coarsely 3-7-nerved, dorsally glabrous, puberulent or setose, glabrous within, either persistent or tardily deciduous.
Leaf-formula variable especially in number of pinnae, the lf-stks 0.5-6(-8) cm, at middle 0.4- 0.8 mm diam., shallowly sulcate ventrally, espiculate, the petiole commonly 0.5-3.5, in var. neuroloma only 0.15-0.4 cm, in var. paraguariae to 6.5 cm, the interpinnal segments, when present, 2-10 mm; pinnae exactly 1-, 1-2-, 2-5-, 4-8-jug., when 2-jug. or more either distally accrescent or irregularly graduated, the rachis of longer ones 2.5-9.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1.2-3.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae commonly 15-40-, rarely only 11-15-jug., a little decrescent at each end of rachis, the first pair 0.6-1.7 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.5-2 mm, all in outline obUquely lanceolate or lance-oblong, acute or abruptly apiculate, broadest at obtusangulate base, the larger ones 7-17 x i,2-4(-5.5) mm, 2.8-5(-5.5) times as long as wide, all 3-5-nerved from pulvinule, the dorsally stout and pallid midrib displaced to divide blade 1:2.5-5, the posterior nerves weaker, the inner one incurvedascending ^3-% length of blade, the exterior ones shorter, the continuous or subcontinuous series of marginal setae variable in girth, their tips free for 0.7-1.7 mm and usually appressed or narrowly ascending, rarely patent.
Peduncles 2-6.5 (-7.5) cm, solitary at some early nodes but mostly 2-3-nate distally; capitula globose or plumply eUipsoid, without filaments 6-7 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obovoid 4-keeled ffbuds densely grayor silvery-strigulose between the keels with retrorsely subappressed hairs; bracts linear-oblanceolate 0.8-2 mm, dorsally glabrous and prominently carinate, thinly setoseciliolate distaUy; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some proximal ones staminate and shorter; calyx membranous 0.15-0.25 mm, the truncate or obscurely lobulate rim either glabrous or minutely ciliolate; corollas 2-3.2 mm, the shorter ones narrowly turbinate, the longer funnelform-subcylindric, the firm but not corneous cymbiform lobes 0.6-1.1 X 0.4-0.6 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 4.5-8 mm.
Pods ±2-20 per capitulum, sessile or contracted at base into an obscure stipe less than 1 mm, the narrowly oblong body (8-) 10-18 X 3-4 mm, undulately constricted at isthmi between 2-5(-6) seeds, the replum 0.3-0.5 mm wide, hispid along back and sides with erect, microscopically scaberulous setae 0.6-1.5 mm, the ripe valves papery brownish-stramineous, densely strigose-hispidulous with appressed or subappressed retrorse setae a little shorter than those of replum, when ripe breaking up into free-falling indehiscent biconvex articles 2.5-4 mm long; seeds plumply lenticular 2-2.8 X 1.7-2.5 mm, the testa either fuscous or pale yellow-brown, smooth.
Here assembled under the collective name M. distans will be found elements derived from two Benthamian series of Eumimosa: from ser. Pedunculosae, M. elongata and M. distans; and from ser. Meticulosae, M. neuroloma.
Bentham separated these species by inconstant characters of pinna-number and by strength of setae that mn together to form a pallid marginal nerve of variable girth.
But these and others subsequently discovered are essentially identical in morphology of the ffower and fruit, and have in common a distinctive subdimidiate leaffet and retrostrigulose corolla.
The constituent varieties ofM. distans are conveniently divided by leaf-formula into a subsp. elongata, in which the pinnae vary in number from one to two, two to five, or four to eight pairs, and a subsp. distans, in which the pinnae are stabilized at exactly one pair.
The latter is widely dispersed, in the form of var. distans, over much of the Brazilian Planalto, and is represented in the central highlands by a relatively rare var. neuroloma.
The subsp. elongata is composed of several, more local, varieties concentrated in central Goias and the Federal District but has an outlying member in Paraguay.
This pattem of dispersal is comparable, on a more modest scale, to that described for M. somnians: one widespread subspecies, ostensibly primitive relative to the rest, containing within its compass increasingly specialized and geographically restricted derivatives.
If this hypothesis is correct, the varieties ofM distans with plurijugate leaves have arisen from conjugately pinnate ancestry.
Key to subdivisions o f M distans Pinnae of all lvs exactly 1-jug.; range of the sp.; subsp. distans: 2.
Lvs relatively few, distant and well-petiolate, the stem-internodes mostly 3-7 cm, the lf-stks including pulvinus 5-25(-30) mm; rachis of longer pinnae 5-9.5 cm; marginal setae of lfts relatively stout, near or below middle 0.15-0.3 mm diam 462/Ia. var. distans (p. 751).
2.
Lvs relatively many, crowded along stem and only shortly petiolate or subsessile, the stem-internodes ±2-3(-3.5) cm, the lf-stks including (or largely consisting of) pulvinus 1.5-4 mm; rachis of longer pinnae (2.5-)3-5 cm; marginal setae of lfts slender, 0.05-0.1 mm diam 462/Ib. var. neuroloma (p. 751).
Pinnae either of some lvs 2-jug., or of all lvs 3-8-jug.; highlands of s.-centr. Goias and adjacent Brazilian states, one disjunct in Paraguay and adj. Brazil (w. Parana): subsp. elongata: 3.
Pinnae commonly 2-5-jug., exceptionally 1-jug. in some lvs, but the lfts then not over 11 x 2.7 mm.
4.
Pinnae of all lvs at least 2-jug., of larger lvs commonly 3-8-jug.; Brazil.
5.
Petiole 0.7-3(-3.5) cm, not over 2.5 times as long as rachis of lf-stk. 6.
Pinnae of larger lvs 2-4-, exceptionally 5-jug., and petiole 1-2 times as long as rachis.
.
462/IIa. var. elongata (p. 752).
6.
Pinnae of larger lvs (3-)4-8-jug., and petiole shorter than rachis 462/IIb. var. planaltinae (p. 752).
5.
Petiole 2.5-6.5 cm, 2.5-6 times as long as rachis of lf-stk; local in Paraguay and w. Parana, Brazil 462/IIc. var. paraguariensis (p. 752).
4.
Pinnae partly 1-, partly 2-jug.; known only from Distrito Federal, Brazil 462/IId. var. quadripinna (p. 752).
3.
Pinnae partly 1- and partly 2-jug., and lfts at same time few and large, in longer pinnae 11-17(-19)- jug. and attaining 12-16 x 3.5-5 mm; Chapada dos Veadeiros, Goias 462/IIe. var. terezinae (p. 752).
462/1.
Mimosa distans Bentham subsp. distans.
M. distans Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens, str.—Typus infra sub var. distanti indicatur.
Pinnae of all lvs exactly 1-jug.; w. Bahia and centr. Minas Gerais s. to Parana, w. to e. Mato Grosso and n. Mato Grosso do Sul. Mimosa distans and M neuroloma, here more closely associated as varieties ofM distans, were first described, each from few collections, as members of ser. Meticulosae ***Semistrigosae, and M. neuroloma was confused, in the first instance, with M meticulosa Martius, which Bentham later found to be something else (exactly what is even today unknown).
Bentham admitted to difficulty in distinguishing these two species, and the difficulty has not been dissipated by modem collections.
In his monograph Bentham (1875, 1876) transferred M distans to ser. Pedunculosae, stating (1876: 326) that despite nearly dimidiate leaflets it was readily distinguished from M neuroloma, retained in ser. Meticulosae, by form of inflorescence, meaning, it seems, by relative length and arrangement of the peduncles.
It is no longer possible, however, to separate two credible species by peduncle-length or by prevalence of strictly axillary longer peduncles over pseudoracemose shorter ones.
Shifting emphasis to length and proximity along the stem of cauline leaves, length of leaf-stalks and girth of setae on leaflet-margin, each to some degree individually variable, it is possible to maintain two taxa, but only at the varietal level.
462/Ia. Mimosa distans Bentham subsp. distans var. distans.
M distans Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens, str. —"BrazU, Sello, Pohl, Langsdorff, Claussen, Goyaz, Gardner, n. 3135."
, the data expanded in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 325.1876 to: ".
.
. in campis altis provinciae Minas Geraes: Claussen .
.
. ad Serra de Pitangue et Rio Salgado: Sello; ad Formingas et S. Joao: Pohl; .
.
. m provincia Goyaz... ad Meiaponte: Pohl; in campis altis Missionum Douro: Gardner n. 3135."—Lectotypus, Gardner 3135, collected at "Upland Caiapo Mission, Duro, X.1839," K!; isotypus, BM!; syntypi: Sello 235, K! +B = FNeg.
1314, Pohld.1364 = 604, K! NY! W! Riedel (misit Langsdorff) 2035, E! GH! K! P! M. axillaris sensu Bentham, 1876: 326, ex parte (Burchell 6114 e Silvania, Goias).
M. distans sensu Lewis, 1987, fig. 9P. Leaf formula i/(18-)20-40, the petiole 5-25 (-30) mm, the axis of longer pinnae 5-9.5 cm, the larger lfts 9-15 x 2-4 mm; otherwise as given in key to varieties.
In open, often disturbed places in cerrado or cerradao, sometimes weedy along highways and in pastures, 450-950 m, scattered over the BrazUian Planalto from middle and upper S. Francisco valley in centr. and s. Minas Gerais and far w. Bahia s. just into e. Parana, w. across middle and s. Goias to the upper rio Araguaia in s.-e. Mato Grosso.—Fl.
X-II, the fruits or the empty repla long persistent.
462/Ib.
Mimosa distans Bentham subsp. distans var. neuroloma (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M neuroloma Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 406.
1875 & in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 341, descr. ampliat.
1876, based on M meticulosa sensu Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 382.
1842; non Martius.-"BrazU, Pohl, Sello.'\ the localities amplified in 1876, I.e.: "Minas Geraes et Goyaz.
.
. ."—Lectotypus, Pohl d.l309 = 1472, collected 1.1819 (fl) at Olho da Agua in s.-centr. Goias, K (hb. Hook.)! = NY Neg. 1835; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54849, M (2 sheets)! NY! US! W!; syntypus, Sello s.n.,
K! Leaf-formula i/20-26, the petiole 1.5-4 mm, the rachis of longer pinnae (2.5-)3-5 cm, the longer lfts 7-11 x 1.8-2.8 mm; otherwise as given in key to varieties.
In habitats of var. distans, 525-1000 m, local within the range of var. distans and much less common, s.-centr. Goias and s.-e. Mato Grosso, s. through the Triangulo Mineiro just into n. S. Paulo.-H. XII-III. 462/11.
Mimosa distans Bentham subsp. elongata (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M elongata Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 369.
1841.- Typus infra sub var. elongata indicatur.
Pinnae of some or of all lvs 2-jug. or more; e.- centr. and s.-e. Goias, Distrito Federal, and adj. Minas Gerais; disjunct in Paraguay.
462/IIa.
Mimosa distans Bentham subsp. elongata (Bentham) Bameby var. elongata.
M elongata Bentham, 1841, I.e., sens, str.—"Brazil, Pohl.'\ the locality amplified in Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 323.
1876: "ad [Fazenda] Cercado [near Corumba, Goias]."—Holotypus, Pohl d.l406 = 1215, collected 1.1819 (fl), K (hb. Benth.)! = NY Neg. 1802; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54833, K(hb. Hook.)!,
M! = FNeg.
6179, NY! US! W! M. elongata sensu Bentham, 1875: 399.
Leaf-formula ii-iv(-v)/( 13-) 15-25, the petiole ± 1-3.5 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 2.5-5.5(- 6.5) cm, the larger lfts 6-17 x (1-)1.2-2.7 mm.
In cerrado and stony campo, 750-1000 m, apparently uncommon in Distrito Federal and closely adj. Goias and Minas Gerais.—FI.
XIIII.
Several ecotypes of var. elongata are known.
The typical form has stems pilose with widely descending setae and is matched by modem collections from near Niquelandia and Cabeceiras in Goias.
From Sobradinho in the Federal District comes a more slender form with appressedstrigose stems (Irwin 11433, 11443a, NY); and from neighboring Minas Gerais (mun. Buriti, 200 km e. of BrasUia, Irwin 5471, NY) a glabrescent form with glaucescent leaflets.
462/IIb.
Mimosa distans Bentham subsp. elongata (Bentham) Bameby var. planaltinae Barneby var. nov. a var. elongata foliorum pinnis plerumque 4-8 (nec 2-4)-jugis rachique petiolum suum superanti diversa.—Brazil.
Goias: Sa.
Geral de Goias, on rio Parana ±35 km n. of Formosa on road to S. Gabriel, 29.
III.1966 (fl, fr), Irwin (with Grear, Souza & Reis dos Santos) 7^227.—Holotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, NY, R, S, US. Leaf-formula (iU-)iv-viii/22-30, the petiole 6- 30 mm, mostly shorter than or about as long as rachis, the rachis of longer pinnae 2.5-5.5 cm, the larger lfts 6-7 x 1.2-1.7 mm.
In cerrado, ±950-1050 m, in upper valley of rio S. Bartolomeu in n.-e. quarter of Distrito Federal and n. into Sa.
Geral in neighboring Goias. — n .
XIII-II. 462/IIc.
Mimosa distans Bentham subsp. elongata (Bentham) Bameby var. paraguariensis Bameby, var. nov., a caeteris M distantis varietatibus caulibus humistratis 2-4 dm longis et praecipue foliorum petiolo elongato (2-)2.5- 6.5 cm longo rachin suum 3-6-plo superanti diversa. —Paraguay.
Caaguazu: In viciniis Caaguazu, III. 1905 (fl), E. Hassler 9224.- Holotypus, G; isotypi, GH, K, NY, W.-M. elongata var. paraguariensis Hassler, PI. parag.
1905, in sched.,
nom. nud. Leaf-formula ii-iii/12-22, the petiole 2.5-6 cm, the rachis 0.3-1.3 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 2.5-3 cm, the larger lfts 8-9 x 1.8-2.2 mm.
In unrecorded habitat, to be expected in moist campo near 300 m, known only from e. and s. Paraguay in lat. ±23°30'-25°30'S (Sa. de Amambay; Caaguazu) and s.-w. Parana, Brazil (Larangeiras do Sul).-n. (?-)III(-?).
462/IId.
Mimosa distans Bentham subsp. elongata (Bentham) Bameby var. quadripinna Barneby, var. nov., a caeteris subspeciei elongatae formis praeter var. terezinae foliorum majorum pinnas confertim 2-jugis, a var. terezinae foliolis dimidio minoribus ±7 x 1.7 (nec 12- 16 X 3.5-5.5) mm usque metientibus diversa.—Brazil.
Distrito Federal: Parque Zoobotanico, BrasUia, 7.
XII.1966 (fl), A. P. Duarte 10057.-Holotypus, BRADE 46010; isotypus, NY.
Leaf-formula (i-)ii/21-28, the petiole 7-17 mm, the rachis (0-)2-3 mm, the rachis of longer pinnae 3.5-5.5 cm, the longer lfts ±7 x 1.7 mm.
In unrecorded habitat, to be expected in cerrado near 950 m, known only from Distrito Federal, Brazil.
462/IIe.
Mimosa distans Bentham subsp. elongata (Bentham) Bameby var. terezinae Barneby, var. nov., inter subspeciei elongatae varietates pinnis 1-2-jugis simulac foliolis paucis majusculisque 1 l-17(-19)-jugis et 12-16 x 3.5-5.5 mm usque praestans.—BrazU.
Goias: Chapada dos Veadeiros ±40 km n. of Veadeiros, 1000 [perhaps nearer 1100] m, 15.
III.1969 (frjun), Irwin (with Reis dos Santos, Souza & Fonseca) 24447.—Ylolotypus, UB; isotypi, G, K, LE, NY, P, R, US. Leaf-formula i-ii/11-17(-19), the petiole 1- 3.5 cm, the rachis 0-1.2 cm, the rachis of longer pinnae 4-8 cm, the larger lfts 12-16 x 3.5-5.5 mm.
In cerrado or campo rupestre near 1100 m, known only from Chapada dos Veadeiros near lat. 14°S in e.-centr. Goias.-R. I-III. E(ii.32).
Series MIMOSA subseries RAMENTACEAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Ramentaceae Bameby, subser. nov. monotypica affinitatis incertae, foliolomm numero et ambitu subsigmoideo subser. Dryandroideas referens, sed habitu, inflorescentia juniori confertim pyramidato-paniculata, foliolisque immarginatis infra parce strigulosis (nec incano-tomentellis) diversa, habitu melius cum subser. Pogocephalis congrua, flosculis autem retrostrigulosis, foliolis sigmoideis et patria distanti aberrans.—Sp. typica (unica): M. ramentacea Burkart.
Slender erect unarmed shrubs with defoliate older and densely foliate young branches, these silky-pilose with downswept, outwardly curved setae, the young inflorescence of globose capitula terminally paniculate, foliate in age; stipules 3- 5-nerved, persistent on annotinous branches; leafformula i/25-32, the lf-stk almost 0, espiculate, the shaUow-sigmoid 2-nerved Ifts less than 4 mm, bicolored, discontinuously marginate, thinly strigose beneath; calyx pappiform, at most 0.8 mm; corolla retrostrigulose; filaments free; fruit a marginally hispid, ± 4-seeded craspedium.
Sp.
1, of cloud-forest in Sa. do Mar in Sta. Catarina, Brazil.
In the protologue Burkart assigned M ramentacea to ser. Obstrigosae, in deference to its downswept (but neither retrorsely appressed nor basally calcarate) cauline setae, but acknowledged an affinity to ser. meticulosae and to M lanata.
To the differences from M lanata in habit, inflorescence and calyx noted by Burkart must be added retrostrigulose corolla and forwardly arched leaflets, characters that suggest much closer relationship to subser. Dryandroideae as described herein.
Mimosa ramentacea differs from the Dryandroideae in developing slender defoliate trunks below the densely foliate homotinous branchlets, in crowded paniculate capitula, and in leaflets lacking either a continuous marginal nerve or felted hypophyllum.
The general habit ofM ramentacea is compatible with subser. Pogocephalae, but the asymmetry of the leaflets and the retrorse pubescence of the flowers are not.
463.
Mimosa ramentacea Burkart in Reitz, Fl. ilustr. catarin.
LEGU/I: 189, est. 30.
1979.- "Santa Catarina: Bom Retiro, between Fazenda Campo dos Padres and Fazenda Sto. Antonio, Campo dos Padres, dwarf forest, 1400- 1650 m .
.
.
L. B. Smith and R. M. Klein 7.797 (21.11.1956)."-Holotypus, SI (not seen); isotypi, F! = F Neg. 57536, NY! US! Unarmed shrubs ± 1 m with slender defoliate and glabrate, dark brown trunks scaly at nodes with marcescent stipules, the densely foliate hornotinous stems shaggily silky-pilose with flexible, declined and outwardly curved, rufescent flagelliform setae to 1.5 mm, the If-rachises antrorsely setulose, the small crowded lfts bicolored, glaucous-brownish and glabrous above, beneath paler reddish-brown and finely minutely strigulose, the numerous small subglobose graypuberulent capitula solitary in the axil of hysteranthous lvs, at early anthesis crowded into small pyramidal panicles exserted ±4-5 cm above expanded lvs but foliate in fruit.
Stipules erect, firmly papery, lance-ovate 2.5-3.5 x 1 mm, minutely puberulent dorsally, 3-5-nerved, setuloseciliolate proximally, persistent but dry and fragile or shreddy with age.
Leaf-stalks reduced to pulvinus or almost so, not over 1.5 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones ±20-28 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.5-0.7 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 25-32-jug., decrescent toward each end of rachis, the first pair less than 1 mm distant from subulate paraphylUdia ±0.6 mm, the blades narrowly oblong from bluntly auriculate base and falcately curved forward beyond middle, the longer ones 2.5-3.5 x 0.8-1.2 mm, aU weakly 2-nerved dorsally, the simple midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the posterior nerve weak and short.
Peduncles 6-14 mm, retrosetose like young stems; capitula without filaments 4.5-5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the obtuse fl-buds retrorsely strigulose overall; bracts linearoblanceolate 1-1.5 mm, setulose-ciliolate, deciduous;flowers 4-merous 4-androus, retrorsely graypuberulent; calyx pappiform, the campanulate tube 0.3 mm, extemally brown glabrous, the truncate orifice ciliolate with basally confluent stramineous setulae ±0.4-0.5 mm; corolla narrowly vase-shaped ±2.5 mm, the ovate, shallowly concave 1-nerved lobes ±1 x 0.5 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted ±4 mm.
Pods (few seen, and none fully ripe) sessile, in profile ±15-20 x 5.5 mm, 3^-seeded, the slender replum hispid with long rusty setae, the valves more thinly and loosely setulose, probably breaking up into free-falling articles.
In campo at margin of cloud forest at 1500- 2000 m, near crest of Sa. do Mar in s.-e. Sta. Catarina (mun. Bom Retiro, near 28°S).—Fl.
XI— XII(-?).
E(ii.33).
Series MIMOSA subseries AXILLARES Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Axillares Bameby, subser. nov., inter affines flosculis retrostrigulosis praeditas stipulis firmis extus enerviis, foliolis 30-55-jugis marginatis sigmoideis, calyce saepissime paleaceo-pappiformi rarius parvo ciliolato (nec minimo obsolescenti) recognoscenda, a subser. Macrocalycinis, habitu caeterisque comparabili, petiolis espicutais et coroUae pube reversa abstans.—Sp. typica: M. axillaris Bentham.
Unarmed, diffuse or prostrate subshrubs, strigose or hirsute with either smooth, scabemlous, or plumulose setae, the many smaU crowded lfts bicolored, sigmoidally arched forward beyond mid-blade; stipules of firm texture, not visibly nerved extemally; leaf-formula i/(28-)30-55, the lf-stks 3-50 mm, espiculate, the lfts to 3.5-9 mm, either plane or dorsally concave, continuously marginate, 1-3-nerved; inflorescence of axillary spikes or capitula; calyx either paleaceous-pappiform or (M niederleinii) short-campanulate ciliolate; corolla retrostrigulose either overaU or from middle downward; filaments free or almost so; fruit a 2-4-seeded craspedium.
Spp. 4, of campo habitats in extratropical Brazil (Parana s.-ward) and adj. Argentina.
The one species of subser. Axillares known to Bentham was included in the heterogeneous ser. Pedunculosae and in Flora brasiliensis confused with M distans.
In hindsight it seems obvious that M axillaris was misplaced in Pedunculosae and that its close kindred are three species with spicate inflorescence, of which the first discovered and best known is M niederleinii.
Characters common to these four species are firm, extemally nerveless stipules, numerous tildeshaped, continuously marginate leaflets, and flowers retrostrigulose at least in the lower half, commonly overall.
The subseries most nearly resembling the Axillares in general habit and leafformula is Macrocalycinae, but these have evidently nerved stipules, spiculate leaf-stalks, and antrorsely puberulent flowers.
The kindred subser. Dryandroideae is instantly recognized by dorsally felted leaflets.
Conspectus of subser. Axillares Mimosa * Lf-stks 4-20 mm; cauline setae either smooth, or scabemlous, or plumose; lfts either concave dorsally or plane, but if plane the midrib little displaced; fls spicate, retrostrigulose from middle downward.
464. niederleinii Burkart 465. pseudolepidota (Burkart) Bameby ** Lf-stks mostly 20-50 mm; cauline setae smooth; lfts plane, the midrib strongly displaced; fls spicate, retrostrigulose overall.
466. kuhnisteroides Bameby *** Lf-stks 3-13 mm; cauline setae microscopically scabemlous; lfts dorsally concave, the midrib subcentric; fis condensed into plumply ellipsoid capitula, retrostrigulose overall.
467. axillaris Bentham Key to species of subser. Axillares 1.
Capitula plumply ovoid-eUipsoid, without filaments l-1.5(-2) times as long as diam.; Rio Grande do Sul 467.
M. axillaris (p. 757).
1.
Capitula spiciform, without filaments 2-6 times as long as diam. 2.
Lf-stks mostly 2-5 cm; no paraphyllidia at base of pinna-rachis; midrib of lfts displaced to divide blade 1:3-6; corolla strigulose overaU; e. Parana 466.
M. kuhnisteroides (p. 756).
2.
Lf-stks 0.4-2 cm; paraphyllidia present at base of pinna-rachis; midrib of lfts much less displaced; coroUa retrostrigulose from middle downward, its lobes antrorsely pubemlent.
3.
Cauline setae smooth or microscopically scaberulous; lfts dorsally concave, glabrous above, 2- 3-nerved; Parana to n. Rio Grande do Sul, w. just into Argentina (Misiones) 464.
M. niederleinii (p. 755).
3.
Cauline setae plumulose; lfts plane, thinly pilosulous above, 1-nerved; centr. Sta. Catarina. ... 465.
M. pseudolepidota (p. 756).
464.
Mimosa niederleinii Burkart, Darwiniana 7(4): 523.
1947 & 8(1): 162, icone adjecto.
1948.—"Argentina.
Misiones: 'Varana, Misiones, Agosto 23 de 1887,' leg. Gustavo Niederlein, Expedicion de la Comision de Limites, Secc.
Hist. Nat. etc.,
no. 1117."—Holotypus, SI (not seen).
M. niederleinii var. riograndensis Burkart, Darwiniana 7(4): 526,fig.4.
1947.-"BrasU.
Rio Grande do Sul: Estrella, J. Dutra 382, III-1899, R 23614."-Holotypus, R! M. niederleinii war. niederleinii sensu Burkart, 1979: 210.
M. niederleinii war. riograndensis sensuBurVart, 1979: 211 4- map.
Prostrate and pliantly diffuse or trailing, unarmed microphyllidious subshrubs to ± 1 m, the stems, lf-stks and axillary peduncles either strigose or hispid with either smooth or scabemlous, exceptionally plumulose, either forwardly appressed or widely divaricate setae to 1-3 mm commonly mixed with minute puberulence, the foliage notably bicolored, the ventrally convex lfts brown-olivaceous lustrous and glabrous above, beneath paler dull and glabrous to pubemlent or sometimes in addition thinly strigose, the cylindric fl-spikes l-2(-3) together on very slender peduncle longer than petiole of subtending Ifbut shorter than its pinnae, hence immersed in foUage.
Stipules firm, erect or in age deflexed, Unear-attenuate 2-5 x 0.2-0.6 mm, pubescent dorsally like adjacent stem, subpersistent.
Leafstalks 4-20 mm, at middle 0.3-0.6 mm diam., obscurely sulcate ventrally, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis (2-)2.5-8.5 cm, the interfoUolar segments 0.5-1.3 mm; lfts (28-)30-54-jug., conspicuously decrescent near each end of rachis, symmetrically so distally but proximally more so on anterior side of pinna-rachis, the first pair 0.3-0.6 mm distant from unequal Unear-subulate paraphyllidia 0.5-1.2 mm, the blades Unearoblong or -lanceolate from obtusangulate or obtusely auriculate base, deltately apiculate or obtuse, those near mid-rachis 3.5-7.5 x 0.8-1.4 mm, all smooth veinless above, beneath 2-3- nerved from pulvinule, the moderately displaced midrib alone prominent, simple or weakly 1-3- branched on each side above mid-blade, the posterior nerve(s) weak and short.
Peduncles 1.5- 3.5 cm; flower-spikes without filaments (10-)12- 25 X 3.5-4 mm, the fls subcontiguous along receptacle, the fl-buds surpassing their subtending bract, gray-puberulent; bracts linear-setiform 0.7- 1 X 0.2-0.3 mm, dorsally puberulent 1-nerved, setose-ciliolate with weak ascending setulae 0.3- 0.8 mm or ec\[iolate; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx including short, sometimes obsolescent fringe of setulae 0.4-0.7 mm, the submembranous, deltately lobulate tube 0.3-0.5 mm, the cilia not over 0.4 mm; corolla subtubular 1.5-2.1 mm, below middle retrostrigulose, beyond middle puberulent with short spreading-ascending trichomes, the ovate 1-nerved, shallowly navicular lobes 0.5-0.7 x 0.3-0.5 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 4.5-5 mm.
Pods scarcely known, those of var. riograndensis described as 25-30 x 4.5-5 mm, 3-4-seeded, strigose overall.
On river banks and at edge of brejo in the region of campo and araucaria forest between 700 and 950 m in extratropical Brazil, from mun. Jaguariaiva in e. Parana s. to n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul; and apparently disjunct, presumably near 450 m, near Fracran in depto. San Pedro, Gob.
Misiones, Argentina.—Fl.
XII-IV. The wholly extratropical M niederleinii resembles in a general way M reptans and M axillaris, but differs in spiciform capitula, disregarding filaments 3-6 times as long as their diam. The strongly bicolored, ventrally convex and glossy green, dorsally concave and pallid leaflets combined with corollas clothed below middle with retrorse hairs suggest affinity to M perdusenii and M dryandroides.
These, however, are erect subshrubs with globose or only incipiently elongating capitula, their leaflets are densely felted beneath, and their flowers are retrostrigulose overall.
Burkart described three varieties ofM niederleinii, differing in pubescence of stems and leaflets.
The var. niederleinii, represented by the type alone, had forwardly appressed cauline setae and leaflets at once puberulent and strigose dorsally.
The var. riograndensis was said to differ only in leaflets either glabrous or simply puberulent but not strigose beneath; whereas var. pseudolepidota had spreading, plumose cauline setae.
The indumentum of the latter coincides with a modified paleaceous calyx in what is here interpreted as a specifically significant syndrome of characters, but vars. riograndensis and niederleinii lack differences correlated with pubescence.
Among duplicates of collections identified by Burkart as var. riograndensis I find these intermediate or contradictory forms: Hatschbach 24207 (NY) from Piraquara, Parana has proximal leaflets of some leaves densely setose beneath but distal ones puberulent only; and Smith and Klein 11316 (US) from municipio Lages, Sta. Catarina, has stems hispid like those of var. pseudolepidota but with perfectly smooth setae.
The var. riograndensis cannot be exactly characterized and is here reduced to synonymy of M niederleinii.
465.
Mimosa pseudolepidota (Burkart) Bameby, stat. nov. M niederleinii var. pseudolepidota Burkart, Fl. ilustr. catarin.
LEGU(l): 213.
1979.—"[Brasil] Santa Catarina: Sao Jose do Cerrito, 61 km southeast of Campos Novos, 75 km northwest of Lages .
.
. alt. 700-900 m ...L.B.
Smith iScR.
M. Klein 11208.''-Holotypus, SI, not seen; isotypi, NY! R! US! Resembling M niederleinii in lf-formula and spiciform capitula, probably of similar habit, but the stems hirsutulous with spreading-recurved, densely scaberulous setae to ± 1 mm, the crowded lfts lustrous but thinly pilosulous above, dull and scabemlous-setulose beneath.
Leaf-stalks ±9-12 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 3.5-6 cm; lfts 30-45-jug., like those o f M niederleinii except for pubescence and almost plane margin.
Peduncles ±1-2 cm; spikes without filaments 12- 17 X 3 mm; calyx paleaceous ±0.7 mm, the campanulate tube 0.3-0.35 mm, the lobes deeply decompound; corolla ±1.3 mm, the tube densely retrostrigulose, the lobes hispidulous with short scaberulous setulae.
Pod (ex char.) like that of M niederleinii but loosely retrostrigulose.
Habitat not recorded, but to be expected in campo at ± 700-900 m, known only from mun. Sao Jose do Cerrito in centr. Sta. Catarina, Brazil.-Fl.
IIIII(-?).
The type-collection of M pseudolepidota was identified by Burkart as a new species of this name, but published as a variety o f M niederleinii.
The appropriate status of this remarkable plant remains debatable.
On the one hand a close resemblance in most organs indicates near kinship to M niederleinii, but the paleaceous calyx coupled with subplumose, loosely reflexed setose indumentum of the stems and leaf-axes suggests a substantial genetic modification, here interpreted as of specific consequence.
466.
Mimosa kuhnisteroides Bameby, sp. nov., ab arete affini M niederleinii petiolis longioribus plerisque 2-5 (nec 0.4-2) cm longis, pedunculis elongatis 4.5-7.5 (nec 1.5-3.5) cm longis, foliolis planis (nec dorso eximie concavis) setis erectis hispide ciliatis, spicis absque filamentis brevioribus pauUumque crassioribus 4-6 (nec 3.5-4) mm latis, coroUisque paullo majoribus tota longitudine (nec tantum infra mediam) retrostrigulosis diversa.
A M. distanti, coroUis retrostrigulosis necnon foliolomm planorum costa valde asymmetrica simili, foliolis simul magis numerosis 40-55- (nec 15-40-)jugis ac angustioribus 1.5-2 (nec 2.5-5) mm latis capitulisque spiciformibus (nec subglobosis) facilius extricanda.—Brazil.
Parana: mun. Rio Branco do Sul, Serra do Bmmado, 9.
II.1982 (fl), G. Hatschbach 44558.- Holotypus, MBM 73240; isotypus, NY.
Prostrate subshrubs to ± 1 m, in habit and many details resembling M niederleinii, the stems, lfstks and axillary peduncles hispid with smooth, subvertically erect, tapering setae to (1.5-)2-4 mm, the foliage bicolored, the firm plane lfts brownor gray-olivaceous above, paler beneath, glabrous on both faces, hispid-ciliate.
Stipules narrowly lance-attenuate 4-7.5 x 0.7-1.1 mm, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (1-)2-5 cm x 0.55-0.8 mm, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 4-8 (-9) cm, the interfoliolar segments 1-1.5 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 40-5 5-jug., graduated as in M. niederleinii but the small unequal first pair 0.4-0.8 mm distant from pulvinus without intervening paraphyllidia, the blades narrowly lance-oblong from obtusangulate base, those at mid-rachis 6.5-9 x 1.5-2mm, all veinless above, the strongly displaced midrib dividing the dorsal face (at mid-blade) 1:3-6, the inner posterior nerve often faintly brochidodrome.
Peduncles solitary or geminate 4.5-7.5 cm; flower-spikes without filaments 10-14 x 4-6 mm, 2.3-3 times as long as diam.; bracts linear to 1.5 x 0.2 mm, distaUy with a few setiform ciha; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, a little longer than those of M niederleinii, the calyx better developed and the corolla retrostrigulose its whole length; calyx 0.7- 1.1 mm, the shallowly campanulate tube 0.3-0.4 mm, the irregular lobes 0.4-0.7 mm, decompound into pappiform setae; corolla 2-2.4 mm, the lobes 0.7-1 x 0.5-0.7 mm; filaments exserted 5.5-9.5 mm; pod not seen.
A trailing subshmb of barrancos and stony campos near 900 m, apparently local, known only from municipio Rio Branco do Sul in e. Parana (Sa. do Bmmado; Curiola; Cerro Azul), Brazil.— n .
I-IV. While similarity in habit and in most technical details suggests that M kuhnisteroides is very closely akin to M niederleinii, the correlation in the presently available material of small differences listed in the diagnosis justifies specific segregation.
A further differential character of M kuhnisteroides is the lack of paraphyllidia at base of the pinna-rachis, a feature constantly observed in related species.
The epithet refers to an odd similarity in the shortly cylindric capitula of retrorsely silky florets and long-exserted pink filaments to Dalea (formerly Petalostemon or Kuhnistera) tenuis (Coulter) Shinners.
467.
Mimosa axillaris Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 382.
1841.-"Brazil, 5'^//a"-Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Benth.)!; presumed isotypi, Sello d.l331, +B = F Neg. 1310 (cf Burkart, 1948: 171), P! = NY Neg. 11818, Sello s.n.,
Gl Wl M. axillaris sensu Bentham, 1876: 326, ex parte, exclus. char. fmct. et Burchell 6114 e Silvania, Goias, quae = M. distans var. distans.
Slender unarmed microphyllidious shrub or shrublet of uncertain stature, with virgately diffuse or perhaps assurgent, distally few-branched stems, these with lf-stks and peduncles antrorsely strigose with finely tapering, basally puberulent, microscopically scaberulous setae ±1-2 mm and also minutely puberulent, the lvs strongly bicolored, the coriaceous lfts lustrous dark brown glabrous above, beneath shallowly concave pallid dull, pubemlent and also thinly strigose, finely continuously callous-marginate and setose-ciliate, the plumply ellipsoid capitula solitary or geminate in If-axils on peduncle longer than the associated lf-stk. Stipules firm erect, narrowly lanceolate 2-4.5 x 0.4-0.8 mm, densely pubescent like stem, persistent.
Leafstalks including pulvinus 3-13 mm, at middle 0.4-0.6 mm diam., espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 2.5-6.5 cm, the interfoliolar segments 0.6-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 30—41 -jug.,
subequUong except at each end of rachis, the small first pair close to small subulate paraphyllidia, the blades narrowly oblong from deeply semicordate base, beyond middle incurved to the deltately acute apex, those near mid-rachis 3.5-9 x 0.7-1.8 mm, 3.7-4.5 (-5) times as long as wide, all 1-2-nerved, the slender subcentric midrib weakly prominulous on both faces, the posterior nerve, when present, short and weak, the callous margin ±0.1 mm diam. Peduncles 2.5-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments ±5-5.5 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the receptacle setose; bracts linear tapering at each end, 1-1.3 x 0.1-0.2 mm, 1 -nerved, minutely setulose-ciliolate, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx paleaceous-pappiform ±1 mm, the brown glabrous tube ±0.3 mm, the lobes pallid-stramineous and setiform-decompound; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 4-angulate 1.8-2.3 mm, except for the glabrous ribs retrorsely silverystrigulose, the ovate cymbiform but not much thickened lobes 0.65-0.8 x 0.4-0.5 mm; filaments (presumably pink) free to base, exserted ±4 mm; ovary densely strigulose.
Pods several per capitulum, ascending sessile, in profile undulately narrow-oblong ±15-22 x 5-5.5 mm, 2-3-seeded, cuneately contracted at base, cuspidate at apex, the rather deeply constricted replum 0.4-0.6 mm diam., the valves low-coUiculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely strigose with straight appressed pallid setae to ± 1.5 mm; dehiscence and seeds not seen.
In unknown habitat, but to be expected in campo, first collected by Sello somewhere between Montevideo and S. Paulo in 1821-1829, and in modem times on the Ibicui-Camaqua divide in s. Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.—Fl.
XII-? Because of scaberulous setae and capitate flowers M axillaris strongly suggests M (subser. Macrocalycinae) pedersenii, but differs in espiculate leaf-stalks, shorter calyx (about half, not three-fourths or more, as long as corolla), and in corollas retrostrigose overall.
A probably isotypic specimen (Sello s.n.,
BM) has one capitulum about twice as long as wide hinting at the species' true kinship to spicate M niederleinii.
In retrostrigulose flowers and marginate leaflets M axillaris resembles M schleidenii, but this has many fewer and much larger leaflets.
Bentham's record (1876: 326) o f M axillaris from Goias is based on a specimen o f M distans.
E(ii.34).
Series MIMOSA subseries D R Y A N D R O I D E AE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Dryandroideae Bameby, subser. nov., inter seriei Mimosae subseries flosculis retro-sericeo-strigulosis praeditas foliolis praeclare bicoloribus supra lucidis infra incano-tomentellis praestans, ulterius ab affini subser. Axillaribus caulibus erectis virgatis ergo habitu diversa. —Sp. typica: M. dryandroides Taubert.
Erect-ascending 5/zrw^5; indumentum of smooth or scabemlous, either forwardly appressed or downswept setae, the foliage bicolored, the marginate lfts lustrous (when dry brown) above, beneath densely white-tomentulose; stipules firm, extemally nerveless; leaf-formula i/(ll-) 14-30, the lf-stk less than 1 cm, espiculate, much shorter than pinnae; capitula axillary, globose or ellipsoid; calyx either paleaceous-pappiform or membranous minute; corolla retrostrigulose, the lobes densely so; filaments free; fruit a narrow 2-5- seeded craspedium.
Spp. 2, of campo or rupestral habitats in s.-e. Brazil (Rio de Janeiro s.-w. to n.-e. Sta. Catarina).
Among conjugate-pinnate Mimosae the two species of Dryandroideae are instantly recognized by the bicolored leaflets, glossy green above and densely white-felted on the concave lower face.
Otherwise they have many characters in common with subser. Axillares, notably nerveless stipules, shallowly sigmoid leaflets, and retrostrigulose flowers.
They differ materially, however, in erect fruticose habit of growth as well as in the peculiar leaf-pubescence.
Neither species was known to Bentham, and it is difficult to imagine how he would have disposed of them, though the elastic definition of ser. Meticulosae would have accommodated them.
In describing M per-dusenii, Burkart found it to form a nexus between the Benthamian series Meticulosae, Pedunculosae, and Obstrigosae.
Conspectus of subser. Dryandroideae Mimosa 468. dryandroides Taubert a. dryandroides b. extratropica Bameby 469. per-dusenii Burkart Key to species of subser. Dryandroideae 1.
Lfts altemate along rachis; stems antrorsely setose; capitula ellipsoid or oblong-ellipsoid; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 0.8-2 mm; Rio de Janeiro and e. Parana 468.
M. dryandroides (p. 758).
1.
Lfts opposite along rachis; stems pilose with down-swept setae; capitula globose; calyx 0.15-0.25 mm; e. Parana and adj. n.-e. Sta. Catarina 469.
M. per-dusenii (p. 760).
468.
Mimosa dryandroides Taubert, Flora 72: 71.
1892.—Typus infra sub var. dryandroide indicatur.
Unarmed microphyllidious shrubs attaining 17 dm, with virgate simple or shortly few-branched stems, these with back of pinna-rachises and peduncles strigose with straight contiguous, antrorsely appressed paUid scabemlous setae ± 1 - 2 mm, the foUage notably bicolored, the thicktextured, strongly revolute lfts lustrously brownolivaceous above, concave and white-tomentulose beneath, the ellipsoid or shortly cylindric capitula mostly 2-3 together in the axil of coevally expanding lvs, early surpassed by the subtending If, the fruits immersed in foliage.
Stipules lanceolate or linear-attenuate 3-10 x 0.6-1 mm, dorsally strigose like stem, glabrous within, persistent.
Leaf-stalks 2-8 x 0.6-1 mm, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 3-7 cm, the interfoliolar segments 1.5-2 mm; lfts of longer lvs (11-)14- 30-jug., the lfts or most of them altemate along rachis and conspicuously decrescent toward each end of it, the small first pair less than 1 mm distant from setiform paraphyllidia concealed among setae, the blades oblong or lanceolate from obliquely truncate, postically auriculate base sessile against pinna-rachis, either acute or abmptly apiculate, the longer ones near mid-rachis 6-8 X 1.5-2 mm, 3-4.6 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 2-nerved from pulvinule, the prominulous strigose-setose midrib displaced to divide blade ±1:2, the short posterior nerve faint.
Peduncles 1.5-2.5 cm; capitula without filaments 7-15 x 5 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the obtusely 4-angulate fl-buds densely retrostrigulose; bracts linear or linear-oblanceolate ±1 X 0.1-0.25 mm, persistent; y/ow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx paleaceous-pappiform 0.8-2 mm, the lobes decompound to within ±0.3 mm of base into subcapillary setae; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 2.2-2.7 mm, the ovate cymbiform but scarcely thickened lobes 0.8-1.1 x 0.6-0.8 mm; filaments lilac-pink, free to base, exserted 6-8.5 mm.
Pods 2-10 per capitulum, ascending sessile, in profile Unear-oblong, cuneately contracted at each end, when weU fertilized 17-34 x 5 mm, 3-5-seeded, the almost straight replum 0.5-0.7 mm wide, the stiffly papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, the replum and valves alike densely minutely puberulent and either strigose or ascending-pilose with scaberulous setae 1-2.5 mm, the ripe valves breaking up tardily into free-falling articles 4-5.5 mm long; seeds not seen.
Mimosa dryandroides resembles M per-dusenii in marginally revolute, conspicuously bicolored leaflets dark shiny green above and densely white-felted beneath, and in retrorsely gray-strigulose flowers.
It differs from M perdusenii in antrorsely appressed pubescence of stems, in leaflets altemate along the pinna-rachis, and in pappiform calyx.
The species consists of two widely dissevered varieties, var. dryandroides isolated on the Organ Mountains in Rio de Janeiro, and var. extratropica distant 800 kilometers to the southwest in high campos of eastem Parana.
The range of var. extratropica, so far as known at present, lies within that of kindred M per-dusenii.
In addition to the specific distinctions already mentioned, var. extratropica has oblong-cylindric capitula, M per-dusenii globose ones.
Taubert described the flower of M dryandroides as diplostemonous, but I myself have found only four stamens in all flowers examined.
There can be no question that the species belongs in genuine Mimosa, not in sect. Habbasia.
Key to varieties of M. dryandroides 1.
Petioles 2-3 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (11-)14- 21(-25)-jug., on rachis 3-4.5 cm; capitula plumply ellipsoid without filaments ±7 mm long, at most 1.5 times as long as wide; calyx 0.8-1 mm, less than halfas long as corolla; summits ofOrgan Mts in state of Rio de Janeiro and far s. Minas Gerais 468a. var. dryandroides ijp.
759).
1.
Petioles 3.5-8 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 22-30- jug., on rachis 4-7 cm; capitula oblong-cylindroid, without filaments 11-15 mm long, 2-3 times as long as wide; calyx 1.7-2 mm, more than half as long as corolla; campos of e. Parana.
468b. var. extratropica (p. 759).
468a. Mimosa dryandroides Taubert var. dryandroides.
M dryandroides Taubert, 1892, I.e., sens, str.—"Habitat in Brasilia austro-orientali loco non indicato [teste Glaziou, 1906: 183: 'Nova Friburgo, a Pedra [lapsu Pedro] do Conego, Rio-Jan.']: Glaziou n. 11922."—Holotypus, collected 3.
VI.1880 (fl), +B = F Neg. 1406; isotypi, C! G! M! P! = NY Neg. 11811.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
Rocky slopes, 1360-1600 m, known only from heights of Sa. dos Orgaos, state of Rio de Janeiro, and at unknown elevation in mountains of s. Minas Gerais (Baependi), Brazil.—Fl.
IV-VI 468b. Mimosa dryandroides Taubert var. extratropica Bameby, var. nov., a var. dryandroide petiolis pinnammque rachi pauUo longioribus.
Ulis 3.5-8 (nec 2-3) mm, his 4-7 (nec 3^.5) cm longis, capituUs oblongo-cylindricis absque filamentis 2-3 (nec ±l-1.5)-plo longioribus quam latioribus, necnon calycis 1.7-2 (nec 0.8- 1) mm longi setis mediam corollam superantibus diversa; ab affini et sympatrica M perdusenii pube caulina arete antrorsus appressa (nec retrorsa), foliolis altemis, capituUs elongatis (nec globosis) et calyce pappiformi longius recedit.—Brazil.
Parana: mun. Palmeira, Rio Papagaios, 11.
IV. 1971 (fl, fr jun), G. Hatschbach 26655.—Holotypus, MBM; isotypi, C, NY.
Characters as given in key to varieties.
In stony campo and about sandstone outcrops at elevations not recorded, known only from the headwaters of rio Igua^u in municipios Palmeira and Balsa Nova, near lat. 25°30'S in e. Parana.— H. III-IV. 469.
Mimosa per-dusenii Burkart, Darwiniana 7(4): 530, fig. 6.
1947.-"BrasU.
Estado Parana, Capivary .
.
. leg. P. Dusen, en fruct.
21.
X.1908, sin numero "-Holotypus, S!; isotypi, GH! NY!; paratypi, Dusen 14817, G! = F Neg. 28200, S! - M bicolor Dusen in herb.,
nom. nud. M./7^r-<iM5^m7 sensu Burkart, 1979: 185 + map.
Erect unarmed subshrubs over 6 dm but of unknown potential stature, with stiff defoliate trunks and virgate, simple or few-branched, leafy homotinous stems, these with peduncles densely pilose with downswept tapering, smooth or microscopically scaberulous setae ±1-2 mm, the lf-axes pilosulous with shorter retrocurved bulbous-based setae, the foliage eminently bicolored, the subcoriaceous lfts glossy olivaceous and either glabrous or finely villosulous above, beneath white-tomentulose with extremely fine matted hairs, coarsely continuously callous-marginate, the globose capitula pseudoracemose in early praefloration, axillary to coevally or hysteranthously expanding lvs.
Stipules firm erect, lanceolate 4-6 x 1 mm, densely setose dorsally, either glabrous or pubemlent within, persistent.
Leafstalks including pulvinus 2-A x 0.6-0.8 mm, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis of longer ones 4-6 cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 1.5-2 mm; lfts of longer pinnae (20-)23-30-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the unequal first pair less than 1 mm distant from subulate paraphyUidia 0.8-1.4 mm, the blades narrowly oblong or oblong-eUiptic from semicordate base, obscurely falcate, abruptly acuminulate, the larger ones 3.5-8 x 1.2-2.4 mm, 3-4.2 times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath l-2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the slender midrib displaced to divide blade ± 1:2, the posterior nerves, when present, faint and short.
Peduncles solitary 1-2.5 cm; capitula without filaments 5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the densely packed fl-buds silky-strigulose with retrorsely appressed silvery hairs, the receptacle setose; bracts linear-oblanceolate ±1.5- 2 X 0.2 mm, 1-nerved, toward apex setulose dorsally, persistent;y/ow^r^ 4-merous 4-androus, mostly bisexual; calyx membranous 0.15-0.25 mm, irregularly 4-denticulate or -cleft; corolla tubular or narrowly funnelform 2-2.7 mm, the tube thinly, the lobes densely retrostrigulose, the cymbiform, apically hooded, scarcely callous lobes 0.7-0.8 x 0.4-0.5 mm; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 3.5-4.5 mm.
Pods several per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong-elUptic 10- 14 X 4-5 mm, 2-4-seeded, the straight replum ±0.6 mm wide, densely covered with short stramineous bulbiform setae, the stiffly papery valves comose with pallid tapering setae to 2.5-4 mm, when ripe breaking up into free-falling articles 2.5-3.5 mm long; seeds (ex char.) ±2.5 mm.
In wet campo near 800 m, local on sources of rios Tibagi and Igua^u, in lat. ±25°-26°S, in e. Parana and immediately adj. Sta. Catarina.—Fl.
II-IV. E(ii.35).
Series MIMOSA subseries D U T R A N A E Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Dutranae Bameby, subser. nov. monotypica, verosimiliter subser. Reptantibus, foliolis marginatis flosculisque retrostrigulosis comparabili, affinis, sed pube e setis dorsiventraliter compressis basi minutim calcaratis constanti necnon inflorescentia partiaU spicata (nec capitata) dispar.—Species unica: M. dutrae Malme.
Small prostrate unarmed, adventitiously radicant herbs strigose with forwardly appressed, dorsiventrally compressed, basally minutely calcarate setae; stipules 1-nerved; leaf-formula i/10- 18(-?28); lf-stks well developed, espiculate; lfts plane, continuously marginate, less than 1 cm, ± 2-nerved; flowers spicate; corolla retrostrigulose, but a few minute antrorse hairs at tip of lobes; filaments shortly monadelphous below ovary; fruit a 2-3-seeded craspedium.
Sp.
1, of upland campo in n.-e. Rio Grande do Sul and adj. Sta. Catarina, Brazil, and reported from Uruguay.
The elegant little M dutrae combines in one plant the humifuse stems and continuously marginate leaflets of M (subser. Reptantes) schleidenii with the spicate inflorescence ofM (subser. Axillares) niederleinii.
It differs from both in a peculiar indumentum offlattened,basally spurred setae, in form reminiscent of subser. Obstrigosae but forwardly appressed, and further from subser. Axillares in straight (non-sigmoid) leaflets.
Its isolated position relative to other extratropical mimosae with retrostrigulose flowers is best expressed by a monotypic subseries.
470.
Mimosa dutrae Malme, Ark. Bot. 23A(13): 10.1931.-"[Brazil.
Rio Grande do Sul:] Cima do Serra, Arroio do Pinto .
.
. ([Joao] Dutra n. 557)."-Holotypus.
S!; isotypus, SI (fide Burkart, 1979, not seen).
M. dutrae sensu Burkart, 1979: 208 + map.
Very slender unarmed herbs with pliantly humifuse, remotely foliate stems 3 dm upward adventitiously rooting at random nodes, except for firm plane glabrous comeous-marginate lfts strigose throughout with dorsiventrally flattened, basally spurred pallid-stramineous setae to 1.5- 2.5 mm, the dense cylindric fl-spikes single in Ifaxils on vertical peduncle longer than subtending If Stipules erect linear-lanceolate ±2.5-3.5 x 0.5 mm, 1-nerved, glabrous, persistent.
Leafstalks 1.5-3.5 cm, 0.25-0.4 mm diam., the terminal appendage subulate, spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 1.5-3.5(-?) cm, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.8-1.8 mm; lfts 10-18-, according to Burkart to 28-jug., decrescent proximally, the first pair 1 mm or less distant from unequal subulate paraphyllidia less than 1 mm, the blades narrowly obUquely ovate or semi-ovate from broadly obtusangulate base, deltately subacute at apex, the longer ones 4.5-9 x 1.3-2.5 mm, ±1.8-3.5 times as long as wide, aU 2(-3)- nerved from pulvinule, the nervation prominulous only dorsally, the simple or faintly branched midrib forwardly displaced to divide blade ± 1: 2, the inner posterior primary nerve expiring near mid-blade, the outer, when visible, very short and weak.
Peduncles 4-11 cm, more densely strigose distally; spikes without filaments 4-5 mm diam., the axis 10-18 mm, the silvery, obtusely 4-keeled fl-buds prior to anthesis a little longer than bracts, these narrowly lanceolate navicular 0.9-1.3 mm, 1 -nerved ^ahrous; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, all seen bisexual; calyx paleaceous 0.8- 1 mm, extemally glabrous, the tube and lobes ± equilong, the lobes shortly ciliolate; corolla obovoid 2-2.3 mm, between keels retrostrigulose except at very tip of lobes (there antrorsely pubemlent), the ovate, shallowly concave, scarcely thickened lobes ±1 x 0.75 mm; filaments pink, monadelphous through 0.2-0.3 mm below the puberulent ovary, exserted ±4 mm.
Pods not seen; according to Burkart linear 10-20 x 3.5- 5 mm, 1-3-seeded, the replum and disjointing valves thinly strigulose overall.
In stony campo, seen only from about 900- 1000 m on the w. slope of the Brazilian coast range in s.-e. Sta. Catarina (mun. Lages) and adj. Rio Grande do Sul; reported (Burkart, 1979, I.e.), presumably at lower elevations, from Uruguay.-H. XI-II. Burkart (1979, I.e.) has described a gigas form ofM dutrae from Encmzilhada do Sul (K. Mohrdieck, SI) with petioles to 12 cm, pinnae to 8.5 cm, and peduncles 18-28 cm long; it may represent a distinct taxon.
E(ii.36).
Series MIMOSA subseries WIDGRENIANAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Widgrenianae Bameby, subser. nov., caulibus et pinnamm rachi seriatim retro-aculeatis, pinnis 5-10 jugis, capituUs plerisque axillaribus, flosculis retro-strigulosis, necnon leguminis 2-ovulati valvis maturis integris praestans.— Sp. typica (unica): M. widgrenii Harms.
Weak scrambling (?) shrubs, armed on stems and back of lf-stks with files of recurved aculei; stipules 1-nerved; leaf-formula v-x/20-32, the longer lfts ±2.5-3.5 mm, 1-nerved; capitula ^obose, mostly axillary; calyx paleaceous-pappiform; coroUa thinly retrostrigulose; filaments free; ovules 2; pods numerous per capitulum, the narrow replum hispid-setose, the valves separating in one piece.
Sp.
1, localized in s. Minas Gerais, Brazil.
In the protologue Harms referred M widgrenii to ser. Myriophyllae Bentham, the only described group that could accommodate a haplostemonous mimosa with armed stems and pluripinnate leaves.
It differs from Myriophyllae, as defined herein, by weak scrambling stems serially aculeate with recurved prickles, by axillary peduncles, and by retrostrigulose flowers.
Its gross appearance recalls diplostemonous M diplotricha, but it has the setae and few-ovulate pod of sect. Mimosa.
In the latter setting the combination of pluripinnate leaves and retrostrigulose flowers is otherwise unknown.
I have no plausible conjecture as to the tme relationship of M widgrenii, the unique character of which is best expressed by subserial status.
471.
Mimosa widgrenii Harms, Repert.
Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 18: 233.
1922.-"Brasilien: Minas Geraes (Widgren [anno] 1845."—Holotypus, +B = F Neg. 14451; isotypi, BR! GH! M!S! Tall, erect or perhaps scrambling herbs, possibly suffmtescent but the lower parts unknown, the coarse, strictly branching, obtusely ribbed reddish homotinous stems at least 7-10 dm and 2.5-4 mm diam., at once armed with irregular files of slender recurved intemodal aculei to 1.5- 3 mm and densely hispid with erect tapering yellowish or rufous setae to 1-4 mm, the dorsal rib of lf-stks similarly prickly and hispid but the axis of pinnae and the peduncles hispid only, the small firm, closely imbricate, ventrally dark-olivaceous, dorsally pallid lfts glabrous or almost so facially, thinly setose-ciliate, the ellipsoid or globose capitula solitary and 2-3-nate in a long succession of If-axils or distally forming a shortly exserted pseudoraceme.
Stipules firm erect-incurved, linear or linear-lanceolate 3.5-6.5 X 0.3- 0.8 mm, 1-nerved and setose dorsally, persistent through duration of associated If.
Leaf-stalks 2- 6.5 cm, the petiole with livid wrinkled pulvinus 6-20 mm, at middle 0.3-0.7 mm diam., the interpinnal segments 3-7 mm, ridged (not sulcate) ventraUy; interpinnal spicules 0; pinnae 5-10- jug., subequilong or decrescent proximally, the rachis of longer ones (10-) 12-25 mm, the interfoliolar segments 0.3-0.8 mm; lfts 20-32-jug., subequilong except at very ends of rachis, the first pair 0.2-0.6 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.2-0.4 mm, the blades oblong or oblong-eUiptic obtuse from semicordate base, those at mid-rachis 2.3-3.6 x 0.5-1 mm, 3.6^.6 times as long as wide, all smooth veinless above, beneath weakly carinate by simple pallid midrib directed obliquely across blade from pulvinule to slightly incurved tip.
Peduncles 1-3.5 cm; capitula without filaments 5-10 x 5-6 mm, prior to anthesis moriform, the obtusely 4-carinate flbuds thinly retrostrigulose between paUid ribs; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1.3-2 x 0.2-0.4 mm, glabrous 1-nerved dorsally, the margins setoseciliate beyond middle, the cilia to 0.5-1.1 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, all bisexual or a few proximal ones staminate and smaller; calyx paleaceous-pappiform, the setae to 1-1.4 mm, obscurely united through 0.2-0.4 mm into four lobes; corolla turbinate (1.6-)2.2-2.8 mm, the firm 1-ribbed, shallowly concave lobes (0.7-)0.85-l X (0.45-)0.55-l mm; filaments (presumably pink) free to base, exserted ±6 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, soon after fertilization thinly setulose.
Pods numerous in globose hispid capitula 13-16 mm diam., each sessUe and in profile broadly eUiptic 4-6 x 3 mm, 2-ovulate 1-2-seeded, the replum ±0.5 mm diam., charged along back and sides with divaricate lustrous golden-brown setae to 3-3.5 mm, the brown papery valves low-colliculate over each seed, thinly yellowish-setulose, when ripe separating entire from each other and from replum but often long retained with seed(s) within the mesh of replar setae; seeds plumply obovoid ±2 x 1.6 mm, the testa fuscous dull.
In moist campo, apparently local and not recently coUected, known only from hill country in the southemmost angle of Minas Gerais, Brazil (Caldas; S. Antonio do Jardim; Machado), near 22°S, 4 6 ° W . - n. (?-)III(-?).
E(ii.37).
Series MIMOSA subseries DIFFUSAE Bameby Mimosa sect. Mimosa ser. Mimosa subser. Diffusae Barneby, subser. nov. monotypica affinitatis adhuc dubiae, habitu M (subser. Polycarpae) tenuipendulam, M. (subser. Pedunculosae) fllipetiolam et M. (subser. Sparsae) pseudocallosam referens, a prima caulibus inermibus petiolisque espiculatis, a secunda pedunculomm setis antrorsis, stipuUs haud striato-multinerviis necnon calyce campanulato, a tertia stipulis 3 (nec pluri)-nerviis, paraphylUdiis angustis foliolisque leviter falcatis diversa, foliolomm ambitu et margine continuo tenui subser. Macrocalycinis forsan propior, sed ab illis foliorum petiolo elongato, flosculis glaberrimis, necnon calyce parvo membranaceo (nec paleaceo) abstans.—Sp. typica (unica): M. diffusa Bentham.
Unarmed, very slender herb, glabrous except for a few antrorse setae on peduncles, the stems subfiliform; stipules 3-nerved; leaf-formula i/30-36, the elongate petiole espiculate, the lfts 1 -nerved, slenderly marginate, gently falcate beyond mid-blade, to 3-6 mm; capitula axillary globose; calyx campanulate ±0.5 mm; filaments free; pod unknown (ovules 4).
Sp.
1, of unknown habitat, known only from Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
The relationships o f M diffusa, a very distinct but imperfectly known species of ser. Mimosa, are ambiguous, and in order to emphasize its apparent isolation I assign it provisionally to a monotypic subseries.
In its very slender habit and long-petiolate, conjugately pinnate leaves it superficially resembles M tenuipendula, M. filipetiola, and M pseudocallosa, but differs gravely from the first in lack of aculei and petiolar spicules, from the second in lack of spicules and in three-nerved, not striate stipules, and from the third in subulate, not suborbicular paraphyllidia, three (not 5-6)-nerved stipules, and free filaments, and from all three in leaflets bent forward beyond mid-blade.
Such leaflets are encountered in subser. Axillares and related groups, but coincide either with retrostrigulose corolla or with a well developed paleaceous calyx foreign to M diffusa.
472.
Mimosa diffusa Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 373.
1841.-"BrazU, Sello.'\ the locality given by Malme, 1931: 13: "inter Rio Pardo et Bage [Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU]."-Holotypus, Sello s.n.,
K (hb. Hook.)!; isotypi, Sello d.l839, +B = F Neg. 13131 P!; probable isotypi, Sello 258, W! Sello s.n.,
G! NY! M. diffusa sensu Bentham, 1875: 401, 1876: 328.
Slender unarmed, apparently diffuse-assurgent, microphyUidious subshrub at least 5 dm. the pliant terete smooth, remotely branched or spurred homotinous stems less than 1.5 mm diam., proximally glabrous, distally like lf-stks and peduncles remotely strigulose with forwardly appressed tapering setae to 1 mm (perhaps, ex char.,
sometimes glabrous throughout), the plane, dull olivaceous-brunnescent lfts continuously finely marginate, minutely ciliolate near base but naked distally, the subglobose capitula solitary in upper If-axils on peduncle as long as or shorter than the associated lf-stk. Stipules erect firm, narrowly lanceolate 3-5 x 0.4-0.7 mm, convex dorsally, 3-nerved, persistent.
Leafstalks 2-4.5 cm X 0.2-0.3 mm, obscurely sulcate ventrally, at apex appendaged but espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., widely divaricate or deflected, the rachis 22-44 mm, the interfoliolar segments to 0.4-0.7 mm; lfts of longer pinnae 30-36-jug., decrescent both near base and upward from a point below midrachis, the first pair 0.3-0.4 mm distant from subulate paraphyllidia 0.4-0.5 mm, the blades subfalcately Unear-oblong from auriculate base, acute, the longer ones 2.7-5.7 x 0.6-1.2 mm, 4- 5 times as long as wide, all nerveless above, beneath I-nerved, the simple midrib displaced proximally but subcentric and arched forward distally, the corneous margin ±0.05 mm wide.
Peduncles 1.5-3 cm; capitula without filaments 5.5-6 mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform, the fl-buds sharply 4-angulate; bracts ovate ±0.5 mm, 1 -nerved, minutely ciliolate, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus glabrous; calyx campanulate 0.4-0.5 mm, the rim obscurely denticulate; corolla narrowly funnelform 4-angulate 2.2-2.4 mm, the erect ovate concave, scarcely thickened, dorsally carinate lobes ±0.7 x 0.5 mm; filaments (of unknown color) free to base, exserted ± 3 mm; ovary substipitate, at anthesis glabrous; ovules four; pod unknown.
In unrecorded habitat, but to be sought in campo, recorded only from the type-locality in s.- centr. Rio Grande do Sul, BrazU.—Fl.
? An old specimen, without data except for serial number 1454, in the National Herbarium at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, may be isotypic.
E(iii).
Series MODESTAE Bentham Mimosa sect. Mimosa ['^Eumimosa'^] ser. Modestae Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 363.
1841.—Sp. lectotypica: M. modesta Martius.
M. IV. Skinneriae & XXXIV.
Vivae Britton & Rose, N. Amer. R. 23(3): 144, 146, in clave, nom. subnuda.
M. ser. Modestae sensu Bentham, 1875: 392; 1876: 309.
Subshrubs, these unarmed, and herbs, these either unarmed or armed at nodes with 1-3 straight or subdecurved aculei, when herbaceous either perennial or monocarpic, some perennials adventitiously radicant from nodes, the foliage of all highly sensitive to touch, the lf-stks and pinnae rapidly deflexed and the pinna-axis bending inward as though jointed at insertion of each pair of lfts.
Indumentum of minute plain incurved hairs and basifixed eglandular setae or setulae, but either or both types of trichome potentially suppressed, the cilia of lfts either stout and backwardly confluent into a continuous corneous margin or very slender and not or obscurely retroconfluent, or sometimes 0.
Stipules subherbaceous, ovate or lanceolate (1-)2-9- nerved, persistent.
Leaf-formula i-ii/(2-)3-7, the lf-stk espiculate, the pinnae when 2 pairs crowded together at tip of lf-stk; pinna-rachis intermpted at insertion of lfts by a discolored band of contractile tissue; larger lfts 3-17 x l-lO mm.
Capitula globose or narrowly ovoid, single or geminate in If-axils; flowers 4-merous 4-androus; calyx either shallowly campanulate and truncate or short-toothed, or either perfectly or asymmetrically pappiform; corolla 1.5-3.9 mm, the lobes cymbiform 1-nerved; filaments pink, free.
Pod a sessile or shortly stipitate, (1-)2-4(-6)- seeded craspedium, that of M. viva humifuse 1-seeded and often adventitiously rooting from a basal tubercle.
Spp. 5, of wide neotropical dispersal both n. and s. of the Amazon and Orinoco basins, from s. Mexico to Costa Rica, and over much of planaltine Brazil, one endemic to Greater Antilles.
The series Modestae differs from closely related ser. Mimosa subser. Pudicae in development on the pinna-rachis between each pair of leaflets of a zone of modified contractile tissue, apparently homologous with that of the pulvinules on either side of it.
At a touch, or at nightfall, not only does each leaf-stalk and each pinna reflex from its point of attachment, but the rachis of each pinna bends inward like the contracted toe of a bird's foot, each interfoliolar segment being articulate by pulvinar cushion with its neighbors.
The relatively few leaflets add a further common denominator to the series, which is, however, in other respects quite heterogeneous, especially in life-form, in development of setae, in girth of the capitula, and in form of the calyx.
As shown in the conspectus of the series, three subsidiary groups exist within the series.
The two species forming the first of these, both endemic to caatinga vegetation in Bahia and Piaui, are strongly perennial, have exactly conjugate pinnae in all leaves, retro-decurrent cilia on leaflet-margins, relatively large, many-flowered capitula, and pappiform calyx; they have much in common with subser. Pudicae sensu lato.
The second group, also of two species but each of these bicentrically dispersed in eastem Brazil and Central America, differs in weakly perennant or monocarpic root-system, either one or two pairs of pinnae per leaf, weaker, sometimes obsolescent leaflet-cilia, smaller fewerflowered capitula, and a reduced calyx; in sum these features point to an advanced evolutionary status.
Finally M. viva, peculiar in habit and in insular dispersal, but resembling the second group especially in indumentum, diminished capitula and small calyx, is an obviously isolated and specialized monotype, further unique in Mimosa (and in Mimosoideae) for its humistrate, adventitiously rooting, 1-seeded craspedium.
These heterogeneous types are, however, conveniently connected by the characteristic jointed pinnae, a feature that is unlikely to have arisen twice in the history of the genus.
With this in mind I transfer M. honesta which Bentham (1875: 392, in nota) already perceived as cognate to M. modesta, from ser. Meticulosae to ser. Modestae.
The series Modestae was first formulated by Bentham to accommodate two of the three Brazilian members of the series earlier described by Martius and the remarkable M. viva, known to Linnaeus through the work of Sloane and Patrick Browne in Jamaica.
By 1875 aU five species recognized herein, but not their whole range of variability, were known.
Britton and Rose referred the two North American Modestae to the informally named categories Vivae and Skinneriae, in the latter segregating several pubescence forms ofM. skinneri here reduced to synonymy.
Except for the addition of M. honesta and the recognition that leaves of M. skinneri may have either one or two pairs of pinnae per leaf, my circumscription of ser. Modestae differs not at all from Bentham's.
Conspectus of ser. Modestae Mimosa * Either fintescent or strongly perennial from woody base; pinnae exactly 1-jug. in all lvs; lfts continuously or subcontinuously comeous-marginate by stout retroconfluent setae (these sometimes lacking free tip); capitula plumply many-fld, withoutfilaments6-10 mm diam.; calyx pappiform or asymetrically setose-ciliate; filaments exserted 4-8 mm; e. Brazil only (Bahia and Piaui).
473. modesta Martius a. var. modesta b. var. ursinoides (Harms) Bameby 474. honesta Martius ** Monocarpic or weakly perennant; pinnae either exactly 1-jug. or in some lvs 2-jug.; lfts ciliate with obscurely retroconfluent setae or eciliate, immarginate; capitula mostly small, relatively few-fld, without filaments 2.5- 6(-6.5) mm diam.; calyx-rim naked or obscurely weakly setulose-ciliolate; filaments exserted 2-6(-7) mm; continental N. and S. America, beyond the Amazonian Hylaea and the Orinoco basin.
475. skinneri Bentham a. var. desmodioides (Bentham) Bameby b. var. minima (Burkart) Bameby c. var. carajarum Bameby d. var. skinneri 476. ursina Martius *** Perennial, humifuse and radicant; pinnae exactly 1-jug.; lfts scarcely or not ciliolate; capitula very small and few-fld, without filaments 1.5-2 mm diam.;filamentsexserted 2.5^ mm; pod 1-seeded, humifuse, sometimes adventitiously rooting; Cuba, Jamaica.
477 viva Linnaeus Key to species of ser. Modestae 1.
Distributed in continental N. and S. America; stems either erect or diffuse, seldom humifuse and then radicant, if at all, only from a few proximal nodes; pods mostly 2-6-seeded, occasionally some 1-seeded by abortion, but these not or only obscurely stipitate.
2.
Perennial or suffruticose, with woody root or xylopodium; capitula plump, densely many-fld, without filaments or emergent bracteal setae 6-10 mm diam; s. Piaui and Bahia, Brazil.
Pinnae of all lvs exactly 1-jug.; cilia of lfts retroconfluent into a continuous or subcontinuous corneous margin.
3.
Small shrubs with stiff ascending stems, unarmed and densely foliate; lf-stks 3-13 mm; local in Bahia 474.
M. honesta (p. 767).
3.
Procumbent or humifuse herbs, randomly aculeate at some nodes and remotely foliate; lf-stks 1-6 cm; s. Piaui and Bahia 473 M. modesta (p. 765).
2.
Monocarpic, sometimes of long duration, sometimes adventitiously radicant from lower nodes but not developing a woody root or rootstock; capitula without filaments of bracteal setae 2.5-6(-6.5) mm diam., in e. Brazil only 2.5-4 mm diam., and where over 5 mm diam. combined with pedately 2-jugate pinnae; of bicentric dispersal: tropical Brazil s. of the Amazon; s. Mexico and Central America.
4.
Cilia oflfts basally dilated and retroconfluent into a continuous or subcontinuous corneous margin; peduncles 7-22 mm; pod 6-7 mm wide, the valves armed on the coUiculus of each article with 1-4 stout-based or narrowly conical, erect, thomlike aculei; all nodes of stem 2-3-aculeate; pinnae exactly 1-jug. in all lvs 476.
M. ursina (p. 771).
4.
Cilia of lfts scarcely or not dilated at base, not retrodecurrent into a subcontinuous margin; peduncles mostly (20-)25-70 mm; pod 3.5-7 mm wide, the valves either equably setose overaU or glabrous, not aculeate as the preceding; nodes either all or randomly aculeate, or unarmed; pinnae either 1-jug. in aU lvs, or 2-jug. in some 475.
M. skinneri (p. 768).
1.
Distributed in Greater Antilles (Cuba and Jamaica); stems subfiliform humifuse, radicant at all or most nodes; pod stipitate 1-seeded, the stipe and the single article subequUong 477.
M. viva (p. 772). .^^ ^^.
J X A.r -.• m '>i/t» -Ul 1.5-20dmfroma woody root-crown, either un- 473.
Mimosa modesta Martms, Flora 21(Beibl. ^ , ^ , ^ ^ ' A * n ^ xT/^x ^^ ^ X T i_ n 1- I-JA lo^o -r armed or commonly armed at some or aU nodes 11(4): 55 (=Herb. fl. bras. 135).
1838.—Typus .., * • u* / • • x- . \ ' ^ ^ , .
J- . with one straight strammeous mfrapetiolar and infra sub var. modesta inaicatur. t-. -.^i. i - » • i • r- ^- , often with 1-2 similar infrastipular, straight or Diffuse or humifuse perennial herbs with subrecurved aculei ±1.5-2 mm, the longer inmostly simple, compressed, distantly foliate stems temodes 2-10 cm, these with lf-stks and sometimes the lower face of lfts glabrous to silkypilose with fine weak or tenuous setae to 1-6 mm mixed or not with antrorsely incurved puberulence, the firm olivaceous or subglaucescent, subconcolorous lfts always glabrous ventrally, continuously comeous-marginate and usually setose-ciliolate, the subspherical capitula single or geminate in If-axils from near mid-stem upward or only distally, on a peduncle longer than the subtending If Stipules firm erect, lanceolate or triangular-ovate 3-6 x 1-3.5 mm, 5-9-nerved, pubescent dorsally or glabrous (like adjacent stem), persistent.
Leafstalks 1-6 cm, openly grooved ventrally, espiculate; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 1-2.8 cm, interrupted at insertion of all but first pair of lfts by a band of contractile tissue and at these points abruptly incurved in sleep, the interpinnal segments, including that between first pair and the subulate paraphyllidia, 3-8 mm; lfts 3-5-jug., subaccrescent and progressively oblique distally, the proximal pair subsymmetrically ovate, the distal pair dilated on proximal side of incurved midrib (this dividing blade 1:3- 5) and semi-orbicular, the distal pair in larger lvs 6-17 X 4-10 mm, all lfts broadly rounded or subcordate basally, abruptly, often excentrically mucronulate at apex, dorsally 3-6-nerved from pulvinule, the primary nerves either simple or weakly few-branched, the secondary venules expiring or obscurely brochidodrome just with the setose-ciliate or rarely smooth corneous margin.
Peduncles 3-12 cm; capitula without filaments 6-9(-9.5) mm diam., prior to anthesis moriform but sometimes silky-ciliate with emergent bracteal setae; bracts linear-oblanceolate or -spatulate 0.6-2 x 0.2-0.4 mm, 1-nerved, either glabrous or minutely puberulent dorsally, usually finely ciliolate but sometimes not; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, many lower ones staminate; calyx-tube 0.2-0.35 mm, the obscurely lobulate rim either glabrous or ciliate, the setulae either few on abaxial side only, or numerous around the rim, the longest attaining 0.5-1.3 mm, when well developed pappiform; corollas subtubular, the tube membranous pallid, the firm ovate-cymbiform, internally livid, externally lustrous greenish lobes 0.5-0.7 x 0.4-0.55 mm; filaments bright pink, free to base, exserted 5-8 mm; ovary at anthesis glabrous, but pubescent after fertilization.
Pods (of var. ursinoides, otherwise unknown) 1-5 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong obtuse, slightly incurved, 13-20 X 7-8 mm, 2-4-seeded, the slender replum ±0.2 mm wide, slightly constricted between seeds, the papery valves densely puberulent overall, lowcolliculate over each seed and there armed with 4-6 conical prickles, when ripe breaking up into free-faUing articles 4—5.5 mm long; seeds not seen.
Mimosa modesta, a species of local dispersal in central and northem Bahia and in adjoining Piaui, Brazil, is most closely akin to sympatric but less common M. honesta, which differs principally in ascending fruticulose, not humifuse herbaceous stems more densely clad in shortpetiolate leaves.
Its perennial woody rootstock, long peduncles, much thicker capitula and longer filaments distinguish it from the also partly sympatric M. ursina.
The known populations of M. modesta vary in length, density and distribution of the indumentum, and the armature of the nodes is in some collections erratic, varying from plant to plant.
They appear to fall, nevertheless, into two series, one consisting of slender, short-setose or glabrate, smaU-leaved plants found on the Atlantic slope and eastem approaches of Chapada Diamantina, the other of coarser, more densely pubescent and more amply leafy ones, vicariant to the northwest in and around the lower Sao Francisco valley.
Key to varieties o f M . modesta 1.
Stems 1.5-4.5 dm, glabrous or thinly pilose with fine weak silky setae to 1-2 mm; lfts glabrous on both faces, the larger ones 6-10 x 4-7 mm. .. 473a. var. modesta (p. 766).
1.
Stems 5-20 dm, silky-pilose with setae to 2-6 mm; lfts setose dorsally or on both faces, the larger ones 10-17 x 7-10 mm 473b. var. ursinoides (p. 767).
473a. Mimosa modesta Martius var. modesta.
M. modesta Martius, 1838, I.e., sens, str.— ".
.
. ad fluvium S. Francisci prope Joazeiro, in prov. Bahiensi."
—Holotypus, Martius 2316, M! = IPA Neg. 1351; isotypus, K! M. modesta sensu Bentham, 1841: 363; 1875: 392; 1876: 309, t. 81,fig.
I; Lewis, 1987, pi. 8D,figs.7F, 7G,'9V. Leaf-stalks 1-3.5 cm; interfoliolar segments of pinna-rachis 3-4.5 mm; peduncles 3-11 cm; corollas 2-2.9 mm; otherwise as in key to varieties.
On most sandy soil at ± 1000-1200 m, known by modem coUections from the e. slope of Chapada Diamantina between 11° and 13°40'S in n. and centr. Bahia, but extending n., according to Martius (not always reUable), presumably at lower elevation, to Joazeiro near 9°30'S on rio S. Francisco.-Fl. (?-)I-III. 473b. Mimosa modesta Martius var. ursinoides (Harms) Bameby, stat. nov. M. ursinoides Harms, Notizbl.
Bot. Gart.
Berlin-Dahlem 8: 711.
1924.—"Brasilien: Nordost Bahia, Pilao Arcado (Ph. von Luetzelburg n. 371); SiidPiauhy.
.
.
Tanque de Arreio (Ph. von Luetzelburg n. 377)."—Lectotypus, Luetzelburg 371, +B; isotypus, M!; syntypus (377) not found at M in 1984, perhaps lost at B. Leaf-stalks 2.5-6 cm; interfoliolar segments of pinna-rachis 4-8 mm; peduncles 4-12 cm; corollas 3-3.3 mm; otherwise as in key to varieties.
In sandy caatinga woodland, (?-)600-l 100 m, scattered in the basin of rio S. Francisco between 9° and 11°S in n. Bahia and e. to the crest of Sa. do Tombador near Morro do Chapeu, thence n. to ±8°S in s.-e. Piaui; to be expected in adj. Pemambuco.—R. \-\l\(-1).—Mimosa da vareda, said by Luetzelburg on label to be toxic to sheep.
Harms compared M. ursinoides only with M. ursina, from which it is, of course, extremely distinct in duration, stature, and much larger capitula, but he overlooked the much closer kinship to M. modesta, from which it is no longer specifically separable.
A pod (Harley 18900) is illustrated by Morim de Lima (1985, photo 19).
474.
Mimosa honesta Martius, Flora 21(Beibl.
11(4): 57 (=Herb. fl. bras. 137).
1838.-"In altis prope Vila do Rio de Contas in mediterraneis Prov. Bahiensis."
—Holotypus, Martius 1974, M! = F Neg. 6184.
M. honestasensuBentham, 1841: 372; 1875:402; 1876: 329; Lewis, 1987, fig. 9U. Unarmed subshrub from woody base, the stiff simple or distally few-branched stems 2.5-4 dm, erect or perhaps sometimes diffuse, at anthesis defoUate in lower V 2 or %, the homotinous stems, lf-stks and peduncles at once minutely vUlosulous and silky-pilose with fine ascending, basally dilated flagellum-tipped setae to 2-5(-6) mm, the coriaceous glaucescent lfts glabrous above, commonly charged beneath at least near distal margin with few short or weak setulae, the corneous raised margin forwardly appressed-setulose, the first capitula axillary, the later ones forming a shortly exserted pseudoraceme.
Stipules lanceolate or narrowly ovate 3-10 x 1.2-2.5 mm, 5- 7-nerved, either pubescent or glabrous dorsally, persistent.
Leafstalks divaricate or refracted 3 - 13 mm; pinnae I -jug.,
their incurved or decurved rachis 7-21 mm, with longer interfoliolar segments (2.5-)3.5-5 mm; lfts 3-5-jug., when pressed imbricate laterally, the small proximal pair 1-2 mm distant from the paraphyllidia, subsymmetrically ovate, the rest progressively oblique, the ultimate pair subdimidiately obovate 7-13 X 5.5-10 mm, all palmately (3-)4-6-nerved from pulvinule, the midrib progressively further displaced from 1ft to 1ft upward, in all excurrent as a short mucro, the lateral primary nerves expiring within the margin or weakly anastomosing with the coarse marginal nerve, tertiary venulation almost 0, all venation immersed above, prominulous beneath.
Peduncles solitary or rarely geminate 2-5 cm; capitula subglobose, without filaments 8-10 mm diam., prior to anthesis silkycomose; bracts narrowly oblance-spatulate 2-2.5 mm, the incurved blade densely setose dorsally at apex; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, some lower ones staminate; calyx pappiform ±2 mm, the tube 0.2-0.3 mm, the subequilong setae confluent at very base; corolla 2.8-3.9 mm, the subcylindric tube glabrous, the ovate-cymbiform, extemally greenish, dorsally keeled, smooth or minutely papillose-puberulent lobes 0.7-1 mm; filaments deep pink or lilac-purple, attached at very base to corolla-tube but free from one another, exserted 4-5.3 mm.
Pods 1-5 per capitulum, sessile, in profile narrowly oblong obtuse ±12-17 X 5-6 mm, 2-4-seeded, the undulately constricted replum 0.5-0.7 mm wide, hispid-setulose on dorsal and lateral ribs, the stiffly papery valves densely minutely villosulous and sparsely setulose, breaking up when ripe into free-falling articles 3.5-4.5 mm long; seeds (1 seen) 3.4 x 2.5 mm, plumply rhomboid, subcompressed around margin, the testa smooth, dull brown.
In campo rupestre on quartzite, 1000-1500 m, endemic to Chapada Diamantin between 12° and 14°S in centr. upland Bahia, BrazU.—Fl.
IX-IV In Flora brasiliensis Bentham remarked ofM. honesta that it recalled ser. Modestae at first sight, but was better referred to ser. Meticulosae on account of its frutescent stems, stiff leaves, and other unspecified features.
There is, however, to this day no known member of Meticulosae (or equivalent series) that resembles M. modesta in detail, whereas its leaf-structure, in particular the sensitive tissue of the pinna-rachis at insertion of the leaflets, is entirely compatible with ser. Modestae, indeed unique to this one group.
The species appears to be closely akin to, and very likely derived from the also Bahian, but much more variable M. modesta (which see for further contrasts), differing most obviously in dwarfshrubby, not procumbent-subherbaceous growthhabit.
475.
Mimosa skinneri Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 85.
1846.—Typus infra sub var. skinneri indicatur.
Monocarpic or perhaps, in exceptional circumstances, short-lived perennial herbs, sometimes flowering from a single erect stem only 1 dm but early branched and the lateral stems procumbent or incurved-ascending, potentially attaining 1 m but seldom over 6 dm tall, in moist places adventitiously rooting from lower nodes, commonly but not invariably armed at each node with one post-petiolar and 1-2 infrastipular, straight or subdecurved, subhorizontally spreading aculei 1-5 mm, the stems, lf-stks and peduncles usually at once puberulent (often in vertical lines) with minute incurved hairs and thinly or densely hispid with slender horizontal rufescent setae to 1.5—4 mm, the puberulence often and the hispid setae only rarely wanting, the thintextured olivaceous subconcolorous lfts glabrous above, beneath thinly pilose or puberulent to subglabrous, the small ellipsoid or globose capitula single or paired in all but the lowest Ifaxils.
Stipules thinly herbaceous, lanceolate 4- 8(-9) X 0.9-1.9 mm, 2-4-nerved from base, persistent.
Leaf-stalks (!-) 10-35(-40) mm, shallowly grooved ventrally, spicule 0; pinnae I - or palmately 2-jug., when shocked rapidly reflexed from tip of lf-stk, the rachis 7-27(-30) mm and longer interfoliolar segments (2-)2.5-4.5(-5) mm; lfts (3-)4-7(-8)-jug., the proximal pair smallest, the rest subequilong, all ± obliquely obovate or oblong-obovate, obtuse mucronulate, the larger ones 4-9(-10) X 2.5-5.5 mm, the blades weakly 4- 5(-6)-nerved from pulvinule, the nerves simple or faintly ramulose, prominulous only beneath.
Peduncles 2-7 cm; capitula without filaments 4- 6(-6.5) mm diam.; bracts linear-oblanceolate 1- 1.6 X 0.2-0.4 mm, glabrous 1-nerved dorsally, ciliate distally on each side with mostly 2-4 fine setae 0.6-1.6 mm; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, all or most bisexual; calyx 0.1-0.3 mm, the rim entire or obscurely toothed, glabrous or microscopically ciliolate; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 1.7-2.4 mm, the tube membranous paUid, the ovate cymbiform livid-purplish lobes bluntly keeled dorsally, glabrous; filaments pink, free to base, exserted 4-6(-7) mm.
Pods ±2-12 per capitulum, usually sessile or subsessile, rarely (var. carajarum) contracted at base into a stipe 1.5-3 mm, in profile undulately Unear-oblong and 12- 21 X 3-6 mm when 3-4(-6)-seeded, but obliquely elliptic to 8-shaped when 1-2-seeded, at apex excentrically cuspidate, the shallowly constricted replum 0.2-0.45(-0.5) mm wide, usually hispid along dorsal and lateral ribs with divaricate tapering setae to 1-4.5 mm but rarely smooth, the papery valves densely puberulent to glabrous and either hispid or not with scattered, random or rarely crowded, often pustular-based setae as long as or shorter than those of replum, when ripe breaking up into free-falling indehiscent articles 3-5.5 mm long; seeds (few seen) ±3-4 x 2-3 mm, the testa castaneous or fuscous, sublustrous.
The foregoing description of M. skinneri accommodates three hitherto distinct specific concepts: M. desmodioides of planaltine Brazil, thought to have only conjugate pinnae in all leaves; similar plants, including the type of M. minima Burkart, with partly or consistently bijugate pinnae; and those morphologically similar Central American mimosas that have been mistaken for or segregated from M. ursina.
These include M. tetraneura Brandegee, M. longicoma Britton & Rose, M. germana Standley & WUliams, and the type ofM. skinneri Bentham, recently shown by Grether (1987) to be the oldest available epithet.
The known populations ofM skinneri sensu lato in its two, widely dissevered areas of dispersal are about equally diverse in composition and density of indumentum, whether of stem or pod, the pubemlent and setose elements varying independently of one another and sometimes, one or both, suppressed.
Tenuous distinctions between North and South American M skinneri can be discerned in width of pod and in size of capitula, which are ellipsoid and plumply many-flowered in Brazil, but turbinate or suborbicular and a trifle narrower in Central America, thus approaching in girth the tiny capitula of M ursina.
Where M. skinneri and M ursina coincide in range, and this occurs so far as known only in North America, the latter is readily recognized by invariably conjugate pinnae, leaflets comeously marginate, and pods characteristically prickly over each seed.
On Serra dos Carajas in southeastem Para M skinneri is represented by a glabrate var. carajarum notable for a slenderly stipitate pod; and in southwestem Mato Grosso by a var. minima, weakly distinguished by a fewbut broad-articulate one.
The unexpectedly rich synonymy that has grown up around M skinneri in North America is due in part to the accident that the type o f M desmodioides is a relatively uncommon variant with pinnae stabilized at one pair, a character crucial in Bentham's classification of the genus, but in part to observed differences in indumentum, the importance of which has been exaggerated.
Key to varieties of M. skinneri Pod sessile or almost so, the stipe, if present, not over 0.5 mm; stems, lf-stks and peduncles at least thinly, but often densely rufescent-hispid; range of the species, from Mexico to Brazil.
2.
Petiole of longer lvs 1-3.5 cm; pods (2-)3-4- or 3-6-seeded, the articles in S. America 3-4.5 x 3- 4 mm and setose overall.
3.
Capitula plumply many-fld, without filaments or emergent bracteal setae 5.5-9 x 4.5-6.5 mm; pods 3>-A mm wide; Brazil (n. Goias and adj. Maranhao s. to far w. Minas Gerais, w. to Mato Grosso 475a. var. desmodioides (p. 769).
3.
Capitula fewer-fld, broadly turbinate or subglobose, without filaments or emergent bracteal setae 3.4-5 X 4-4.5 mm; pods 4.5-5.5 mm wide; s. Mexico to Costa Rica.
475d. var. skinneri (p. 770).
2.
Petioles 0.5-1 cm; pods 1-3-seeded, the articles broadly obliquely elliptic 4.5-5.5 x 4-5 mm, pubemlent overall but nearly or quite esetose; Mato Grosso, Brazil 475b. var. minima (p. 769).
Pod stipitate, in width like that of var. desmodioides; stems, lf-stks and peduncles all glabrous; s.-e. Para, Brazil (Sa. dos Carajas) 475c. var. carajarum (p. 770).
475a. Mimosa skinneri Bentham var. desmodioides (Bentham) Bameby, stat. nov. M desmodioidesBentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 392.
1875 & in Martius, ¥1. bras. 15(2): 309, descr. ampliat.
1876.—"Habitat ad Porto Imperial provinciae Goyaz: Burchell n. 8687."-Holotypus, collected in early 1829 at the present Porto Real, on rio Tocantins near 10°30'S, K!; isotypi, GH! L! NY! P! Characters as given in key to varieties; armed at some nodes or unarmed; pods both puberulent and setose overall, or simply setose overall.
Locally abundant in transiently or permanently wet places, sometimes on earth pans of rock outcrops, on streambanks, lake shores, and becoming weedy on roadsides, 280-700 m, scattered over interior e. Brazil from upper Grajau valley in Maranhao s. through vaUeys of rios Tocantins and Araguaia to the Paranaiba basin in s. Goias and the Triangulo Mineiro, extending w. (one record) to the headwaters of rio Parana in Mato Grosso.-Fl.
XII-IV(-?).
Map 66.
475b. Mimosa skinneri Bentham var. minima (Burkart) Bameby, stat. nov. M minima Burkart, Darwiniana 18(3-4): 429, fig. 3.
1974.- "Brasilia, Mato Grosso, ad nascentes fluminis Paraguay, Rio Anolar [=Rib. de Anolar near Diamantino, ±14°30'S, 56°30'W], in campis, leg. Dorrien Smith 205.
.
. ."—Holotypus, collected V.1927 (fl, fr), K! = NY Neg. 11825; isotypus, SI, not seen.
Armed at the nodes and thinly hispid; petioles 5-10 mm and rachis of longer pinnae ±10 mm; pods mostly 1-2-, few 3-seeded, when 1-seeded obliquely elliptic in profile, when 2-seeded 8-shaped, the articles 4.5-5.5 x 4-5 mm, most of them simply puberulent, a few randomly hispid.
In open ground among short grass, near 600 m, known only from the type-locality on the sources of rio Paraguai in Mato Grosso, Brazil. — H.(?-) IV-V. Map 66.
Burkart appears to have described M minima as specifically distinct from M desmodioides in the belief that the latter had uniformly one pair of pinnae in all leaves.
Once this misapprehension is disposed of, M minima differs only in marginaUy diminished stature and in a pod at once broader and fewer-seeded than that of M MAP 66.
Southem Mexico, Central America, the Greater Antilles, and tropical South America.
Ranges of M. skinneri Bentham and M. viva Linnaeus. skinneri var. desmodioides, but no broader than that of var. skinneri.
The setose pubescence of the pod valves varies even in one capitulum from sparse to none.
Since typical var. desmodioides has now been collected in the upper Paraguai basin, separate taxonomic status for M minima, even as a variety, needs stronger justification than is presented in the key.
More numerous fruiting specimens of var. desmodioides are required before any solid distinction between it and var. minima can be attained.
475c. Mimosa skinneri Bentham var. carajarum Bameby, var. nov., a var. desmodioidecaeterius persimili caulibus pedunculisque glaberrimis et praecipue legumine, etiam glaberrimo, basi in stipitem 2.5-3 mm longum contracto diversa.—Brazil.
Para: Maraba, Sa. dos Carajas, 3.
IV.1977 (fl, frjun), M G. Silva & R. Bahia JOJ i.—Holotypus, NY; isotypus, NY.
Perhaps perennant, glabrous throughout except for ciliate stipules and weakly ciliolate lfts; pod stipitate, as described in key to varieties, the valves under high magnification papillate, esetose.
In scrub woodland, on ferrous outcrops to 700 m and on lake shores, known only from Sa dos Carajas, near 5°20'-6°05'S in e. Para, BrazU.- Fl.
XII, IV-V, the full season unknown.
Map 66.
While loss of pubescence is visually striking, the peculiarity that entitles var. carajarum to taxonomic rank is the stipitate craspedium.
475d. Mimosa skinneri Bentham var. skinneri.
M skinneri Bentham, 1846, I.e., sens, str.— "Cuesta of Leone, Guatemala, Skinner."
— Holotypus, K (hb. Hook.)!; isotypus, K (hb. Benth.)! M. pittieri M. MicheU, Bull. Soc. Roy.
Bot. Belgique 30(1): 294.
1891.-"[Costa Rica.] Pres du Rio Jesus Maria a Puntarenas (Pittfier] n. 502)."—Holotypus, collected 17.
IX.1888, G!; isotypus, M! M. tetraneura T. S. Brandegee, Univ. Calif Publ. Bot. 6(4): 52.
1914.-"[Mexico, Chiapas:] Sierra de Tonala . .. [C A. Purpus] No. 6626."-Holotypus, collected IX. 1913, UC!; isotypi, F! = F Neg. 54794, NY! M. longicoma Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23(3): 152.
1928. —"[Mexico.] JaUsco, Chiapas, September, 1923, [C A.] Purpus 9069."-Holotypus, NY! M. germana Standley & L. O. WiUiams, Ceiba 1: 240.
1951.—"Costa Rica: Naranjo, Prov. Alajuela, alt. 1000 m. Die.
28, 1949, [Jorge] Leon 2011.''-Holotypus, US 22159071 Characters as given in key to varieties; armed at some or at all nodes; pods densely puberulent facially and setose overall (M longicoma), simply setose overall (Matuda 2152, NY), puberulent facially but setose only on replum (Brenes 14331, NY), glabrous facially but setose on replum (M tetraneura), or wholly glabrous (Thome 20522, NY).
On riverbanks, in sandy stream beds, in disturbed brush-woodlands, and in open pine forest, mostly at middle elevations on the Pacific slope, attaining 1350 m in Guatemala, discontinuously dispersed through Central America from n.-w. and centr. Chiapas, Mexico to centr. Costa Rica (Puntarenas, San Jose and Alajuela); apparently isolated in lowland Pacific Mexico (n.-e. of Puga, Nayarit, Feddema 902, MICH!).-F1.
VIII-I. Map 66.
476.
Mimosa ursina Martius, Flora 21(Beibl.
11(4): 56 (=Herb. fl. bras. 136).
1838.-".
.
. ad Arrayal da Feira de S. Anna in mediterraneis Prov. Bahiensis."
—Holotypus, Martius s.n.,
II-III. 1819, "inter [Feira da] Concei^ao et Arr. da Feira de S. Anna in desertis," M! = transparency at ISIY (ex K).
M. paucisperma Britton & Rose, N. Amer. Fl.
23: 151.
1928.-"Jalisco, Chiapas, September, 1923, [C. A.] Purpus 9i06."-Holotypus, US!; clastotypus, NY!- Equated with M. ursina by Grether, 1987: 320.
M. wrawa sensu Bentham, 1841: 363; 1875: 393; 1876: 310, t. 81,fig.
II; Lewis, 1987, fig. 9W. Erect or diffusely radiating monocarpic herbs, the simple or divaricately branched stems 1-6 dm, armed at all nodes with one infrapetiolar and 1-2 infrastipular, subhorizontal, straight or gently recurved stramineous aculei 2-8(-9) mm, floriferous at indefinitely many successive If-axUs upward from below or near middle, the longer intemodes 1.5-4.5 cm, the stems, lf-stks and peduncles at once viUosulous in lines with minute antrorse hairs and pilose with weak slender subhorizontal setae to 2-5 mm, the olivaceous subconcolorous, sometimes pallid-blotched lfts glabrous above, beneath coarsely subappressedor ascending-pilose, the continuous or subcontinuous thickened margin antrorsely setose-ciliate.
Stipules herbaceous lanceolate 3.5-7 x 0.7-1.4 mm, 3-5-nerved from base, glabrous dorsally, pectinately ciliate, persistent.
Leafstalks divaricate or reflexed (when pressed), 7-21 mm; pinnae 1-jug., the incurved rachis 5-27 mm, the interfoliolar segments 2-7 mm; lfts (2-)3-5(-6)- jug., obliquely ovate from asymmetrically rounded or subcordate base, abruptly mucronate, distally accrescent and progressively asymmetrical upward, the longest 7-14(-18) x 3-8 mm, the blades weakly 3-5-nerved from pulvinule, the nerves all simple or the stronger ones tenuously 1-2-branched.
Peduncles solitary (7-)9- 22 mm; capitula without filaments or emergent bracteal setae 2.5-4 mm diam.; bracts elliptic or narrowly oblanceolate 1-1.7 x 0.4-0.6 mm, dorsally glabrous 1-nerved, pectinately setose-ciliate, persistent; flowers 4-merous 4-androus, all usually bisexual; calyx a glabrous cup to 0.2 mm, the rim naked or charged on abaxial side with a few weak pappiform setulae; corolla narrowly vase-shaped 1.5-2.2 mm, glabrous, the firm ovate-cymbiform lobes 0.4-0.5 mm; filaments pinkish, free to base, exerted 2-4 mm.
Pods ±2- 12 per capitulum, sessile, in profile oblong slightly wider distally, at apex very obtuse but mucronulate, mostly 11-20 x 6-7 mm and (2-)3(- 4)-seeded, the shallowly constricted replum 0.2- 0.4 mm wide, hispid along back and sides with erect straight tapering setae to 2-7 mm, the stiffly papery valves either densely villosulous or only microscopically papillate-puberulent overall, coUiculate over each seed and there armed with 1 — 4 stout erect, straight or apically hooked, commonly puberulent but sometimes glabrous prickles 0.5-2.5 mm, when ripe breaking up into freefalling indehiscent articles 4-6 mm long. A gregariously weedy mimosa flourishing in a variety of sunny, often disturbed habitats, of bicentric range in e. Brazil and Central America: in Brazil widespread and certainly native in cerrado, caatinga and savanna, on lateritic, rarely calcareous, often vemally inundated soils between 300 and 950 m, from the Balsas valley near 7°S in s. Maranhao e. to n. Ceara at ±4°S and centr. Pemambuco, s. through centr. and w. Bahia to 16°30'S in n.-w. Minas Gerais, thence barely entering e.-centr. Goias; and locally abunMAP 67.
Southeastem Mexico, Central America, and tropical South America.
Range ofM ursina Martius. dant in grassy and sandy places, sometimes in open pineforest and occasionally on roadsides, (150-)750-l 500 m, perhaps not aboriginally native but long estabUshed in Central America, from Oaxaca to Tabasco, Mexico, s.-e. through Pacific and highland Guatemala and El Salvador to s.- w. Honduras.—Fl. in Brazil XI-IV, in Mexico and Central America (VII-)VIII-I.—A specimen of ^. ursina, Glaziou 9772 (P!), cited by Glaziou (1906: 178) as collected at Araruama near Cabo Frio in Rio de Janeiro, has not been considered in the statement of range, the locality being under suspicion until confirmed.
Map 67.
Mimosa ursina is notable in its series for monocarpic duration, consistently armed nodes, conjugate pinnae incurved in the distinctive mode of ser. Modestae, small, shortly pedunculate capitula, and proportionately broad pod armed at middle of each article with a few stout erect prickles.
477.
Mimosa viva Linnaeus, Sp. pl.517.
1753.— ^''Habitat in Jamaicae /7r<2^/5."—Holotypus, Sloane, Voy.
Jamaica 2: 58, t. 182, fig. 7.
1725!—Typotypus, Herb. Sloane, vol.
6, fol.
49, BM!-The specimen LINN 1228/7, acquired by Linnaeus from Patrick Browne, is not a typus.
Frontispiece (I^O).
M. viva sensu P. Browne, Civ. nat. hist. Jamaica 254.
1789; Bentham, 1841: 363; Grisebach, R Brit.
W.I.
218.
1864; Fawcett & Rendle, R. Jamaica 4: 132.
1920; Le6n & Alain, H. Cuba 2: 246.
1951; Adams, Flowering pi. Jamaica 338.
1972; Bassler, 1985:608, Karte 3 (Cuba).
Diminutive unarmed humifuse herb with very slender, randomly branched stems from a knotty subterranean caudex and rooting from infrastipular ribs at many or most nodes, commonly forming dense mats of foliage, the petioles of the highly sensitive, conjugately pinnate lvs and the solitary peduncles subvertically ascending, the stems either glabrous or thinly hispidulous with scattered setulae ±0.5-0.8 mm, the stipules and floral bracts setose-ciliolate, the subconcolorous dark green lfts all facially glabrous or the first pair of some pinnae thinly strigose dorsally, aU weakly setulose-ciliolate or not so.
Stipules erect submembranous, ovate or obovate 0.8-2 x 0.6- 1.2 mm, either nerveless or weakly 1-3-nerved, persistent.
Leaf-stalks subfiUform (7-)10-35(-55) mm, narrowly sulcate ventrally; spicule 0; pinnae 1-jug., the rachis 5-13(-17) mm, discolored dorsally between insertion of each pair of pulvinules, the longer interfoliolar segments 0.6-1.7 mm; lfts 3-5(-6)-jug., subaccrescent upward, the first pair 0.6-1.7 mm distant from pulvinus (paraphyllidia 0), the blades oblong-obovate obtuse from obtusangulate base, the longer ones 3-5.5 x 1-2.5 mm, 2-2.7(-3) times as long as wide, all veinless above, beneath 2(-3)-nerved from pulvinule, the simple or weakly 1-2-branched midrib dividing blade 1:1.5-2, the inner (or only) posterior nerve expiring or faintly brochidodrome beyond midblade, the outer one when present short and weak.
Peduncles solitary subfiliform (2-)5-25 mm, either shorter or longer than the subtending If, commonly humistrate in fruit; capitula 5-9-fld, 1.5-2 mm diam. at middle, the fls and filaments all erect; bracts narrowly ovate 0.8-1.2 x 0.4- 0.5 mm, dorsally glabrous 1-nerved, weakly setulose-ciliolate, persistent; flowers sessile, 4-merous 4-androus, all bisexual; calyx membranous, shallowly campanulate 0.3-0.45 mm, the deltate fimbriolate teeth 0.15-0.2 mm; corolla (1.5-) 1.7-2.4 mm, subtubular, the erect ovate 1-nerved lobes 0.6-0.9 x 0.4 mm; filaments whitish, free, exserted 2.5-4 mm.
Pods 1- 4 per capitulum, stipitate, the stipe 2.5-3.5 mm, slightly widened upward, the 1-seeded body asymmetrically ovate in profile 3.5-4.5 x 2.5- 3.2 mm, laterally compressed but turgidly dilated over the seed, the smooth replum ±0.2 mm wide produced into a very short curved cusp, the papery greenish, microscopically granular valves either glabrous or thinly setulose over the seed, tardily and often incompletely separating from replum; in many (but not all) pods a nodule at base of fertile article on each side giving rise to 1-2 adventitious rootlets apparently anchoring the pod to the soil; seed plumply obovoid-lenticular 2-2.6 x 1.6-1.8 mm, the testa dark brown.
In moist pastures, on lawns, and on grassy roadsides, apparently local but probably much overlooked, known only from Cuba (La Habana e. to Oriente—cf. Bassler, I.e.) and Jamaica.—Fl.
VIII-III, perhaps irregularly through the year.
Map 66.
This greatly modified mimosa is related, but not very closely, to M skinneri, from which it differs in filiform, always radicant and unarmed stems, 1-2 (not 4-5)-nerved leaflets, extremely narrow capitula, and pods obligately 1-seeded.
The adventitious rootlets that emerge from a nodule at base of the pod's one article have no counterpart in the genus.
Field observation will show whether these rootlets are contractile and serve to drag the fruit into the ground, or merely anchor it at the surface.
The foliage of M viva is said to form extensive mats in low-lying pasture and, being instantly sensitive to shock, provides a canvas for ephemeral graffiti drawn upon it with a stick or finger.
Appendix I N O M I N A INCERTAE SEDIS V E L N U D A Note: In the early literature of Mimosaceae the genus Mimosa was almost coextensive with the family.
Many combinations under Mimosa were correctly synonymized by Bentham (1875) and most of these are not repeated in this appendix, which is reserved for probable true Mimosae of dubious identity and for combinations in Mimosa proposed subsequent to Bentham's monograph but based on types representing other genera.
Mimosa aemula K. Sprengel, Syst. veg. 2: 206.
IS25. —''Brazil.
SeUo."
—No typus known to survive.
The description calls for crowded aculei, a leafformula of ± viii/12, stellate indumentum, and inflorescence of capitula.
The stellate trichomes suggest sect. Calothamnos, but no member of that group is aculeate.
Bentham (1875: 636) thought M aemula unidentifiable, and it will remain so unless a type can be recognized.
Mimosa angulata K. Sprengel, Neue Entd.
2: 158.
1821. —"In Brasilia [no collector mentioned]."—No typus known to survive.
Bentham (1875:636) left this unidentified, and supposed it to be based on a collection of Friedrich Sello, although Sprengel did not state this.
The description calls for a plant resembling the Old World M rubicaulis Lamarck, with a leafformula of xii/many, retro-aculeate stems, interpinnal glands, and a branched paniculate inflorescence.
If Mimosa, this could only be M myriadenia, a species not found in the country botanized by Sello.
It is more likely some aculeate Acacia, unidentifiable unless a type can be traced.
Mimosa arcuata Martens & Galeotti, Bull. Acad. Roy.
Sci. Bmxelles 10(9): 311 [=Enum. pi. Galeotti .
.
.
9(1): 9].
1843.-"170 .
.
. sur le flanc des montagnes calcaires et cactiferes, a Test de Tehuacan de las Granadas, vers 6,000 pieds."
—Typus not found, perhaps overlooked, at BR in 1985.
Described as glabrous, with geminate cauline aculei and a leaf-formula of ii-iii/10-15.
Unknown to me, as to Bentham (1875: 634), but if a true mimosa its name has potential importance in the genus because of its early date.
Mimosa argentea hort. ex L. Bailey, Stand, cycl. hort.
4: 2054 (anglice).
1916.—No voucher found either at BH (P. Hyypio in litt.,
2l.V. 1985) or elsewhere.
This is a cultivated plant thought to have originated in Brazil: stems climbing, and leaf formula ii-iii/40.
It is unidentifiable from the description and may even not be a true mimosa.
The name occurs, as a nomen nudum, in Louis Gentil, Liste pi. cult, serres Jard. bot. Bruxelles 123.
1907, and a voucher should be sought at BR and elsewhere in Europe.
Mimosa brachyacantha (Willdenow) Poiret, Encycl. suppl. 5: 529.
1817, based on Acacia brachyacantha Willdenow, Enum. pi. 1055.
1817.
Willdenow's plant was cultivated and lacked flowers, but was identified by Bentham (1876: 428) as Mimosa acanthocarpa.
I have not been able to confirm this synonymy, though it seems likely enough.
Mimosa brasiliensis K. Sprengel, Syst. veg. 2: 207.1825.—"BrazU [no collector cited]."—No typus known to survive.
According to Bentham (1875: 636) M brasiliensis was based on a collection of Friedrich Sello, but the brief description, indicating aculei paired at the nodes and leaflets and pinnae both numerous, is too vague for identification.
Mimosa buceragenia B. L. Robinson, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 43: 23.
1907.—"VaUey near Tremte Station, in the vicinity of Cuemavaca, Morelos, Mexico, alt. 1220 m., 26 September, 1905, C. G. Pringle, no. 10,073."-Isotypus, NY! This was correctly equated by Britton and Rose (1928: 189) with Piptadenia flava (DeCandolle) Bentham.
Mimosa cafesiana Rojas, "Cat. hist. nat. Corrientes 61.
1897" ex Heslop-Harrison, Ind. kew. suppl. 15.
1974.
An unknown quantity.
Mimosa canahuensis Standley & Steyermark, Publ. Field Mus. Nat. Hist., Bot. Ser. 23(4): 163.
1944.—"Guatemala: Dept.
El Progreso: climbing in thickets, Montana Canahui. .. alt. 1,600-2,300 meters, Febmary 10, 1942, Julian A. Steyermark 43758."—Holotypus, F, temporarily unavailable in 1984-1986.—M canahuensis sensu Standley & Steyermark, 1946: 55.
Not known to me and, since the flower and androecium were not described, of doubtful systematic status.
The leaf-formula of iv-vi/7-11 suggests M teledactyla, but the leaflets (14-19 x 5-8 mm) are much too large, and the pod-valves, said to fall entire, are not compatible with that species.
The habit and armament of recurved prickles suggest M ervendbergii, the pod M. ceratonia.
Mimosa canonis M. E. Jones, Contr. W. Bot. 12: 6.
1908.—"Guyanopa Canon Sierra Madre Mts., Chihuahua, Mex .
.
.
5000 ft aU."-No typus located at POM in 1985-1986.
Described as a strict herb, unarmed, with to 20 pairs of pinnae per leaf, and pods 3-4 inches X 3 lines (±7.5-10 x 0.6-0.7 cm).
Not identified, perhaps not Mimosa.
Mimosa carbonalis A. MoUna, Ceiba 18: 102.
1974-1975.—"Honduras: Dept.
Comayagua: .
.
.
Tamara valley between Amarateca and Tamara, aft.
1000 m, Oct. 10, 1969, Molina & Molina 2^550."—Holotypus, F!; isotypus, NY! This is Piptadenia flava (DeCandolle) Bentham.
Mimosa carinata Grisebach, Symb. fl. argent. [Abh.
Konigl.
Ges.
Wiss.
Gottingen 24]: 120.
1879. = Mimozyganthus carinatus (Grisebach) Burkart, Darwiniana 3: 445.
1939.
Mimosa contortuplicata Zuccagni, Cent, observ. bot. 100.
1806, reprinted by Roemer, Collectanea 160.
1809. —Described from plants grown from seed received from Thouin in 1794.—No typus seen, to be sought at FI.
Features ofM contortuplicata described in the protologue that together exclude the species from Mimosa of current usage are scutellate glands on leaf-stalks and between some leaflet-pairs combined with capitulate white, pentamerous pentandrous flowers, and many falcate or semi-lunate, compressed glabrous pods congested into short racemes and revolute in various, often contrary directions, appearing glomerate, and tuming blackish.
The infmctescence suggests Dichrostachys, but the inflorescence is described as capitate rather than spicate.
Conceivably a Desmanthus.
Mimosa ebano Berlandier, Mosaico Mexicano 4: 418.
1840 [not seen].
This has been transferred to Pithecellobium by C. H. Mueller, Phytologia 41: 386.
1979, and lectotypified by Berlandier 2262.
Mimosa foliolosa (?) var. macrocephala Bentham in Martius, R. bras. 15(2): 389.
1875.-"Specimina Pohliana exstant in Herb. Mus. Vindobonensi, loco non indicato."
—Not found, or not recognized, at W, but to be sought there.
This was said to differ from typical M. foliolosa in slightly larger, copiously ciliolate leaflets pilose beneath and by more hirsute capitula 5 (not 3 - 4) mm in diam. Very likely the earlier name for one of the varieties of M foliolosa described herein.
Mimosa gilliesii Bentham, J. Bot. (Hooker) 4: 413.
1842 = the next following.
Mimosa globosa (Gillies) Macbride, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 59: 13.
1919 = Prosopis globosa Gillies ex Hooker & Amott, 1833 = Prosopidastrum globosum (Gillies) Burkart, Darwiniana 13:439.
1964.
The taxonomy and nomenclature of this and the preceding are fully treated by Burkart, 1964, I.e. Mimosa gratissima Larranaga, Escritos D. A. Larranaga 1: 75.
1922.
Inst.
Hist. Geograf.
Uruguay. —"Se cultiva en uno de nuestros jardines, y se dice venida del Brasil."
—No typus seen.
According to the protologue a tree, with nectaries at base of petiole and between the leaflets (these to an inch long), greenish petals twice as long as calyx, and yellow filaments an inch long. Not Mimosa.
Mimosa gualanensis Robinson & Bartlett, Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts 43: 53.
1907.-"Gualan, Department of Zacapa, Guatemala, 19 January, 1905, C. C. Deam, n. 224."—Holotypus, GH! This has been equated with Adenopodia patens (Hooker & Amott) J. Dixon ex Brenan (Kew Bull. 41(1): 80.
1986).
Mimosa hirsuta K. Sprengel, Syst. veg. 2: 204.
1825.-"Monte Video [Umguay], Sello.''-^o typus identified as such seems to have survived.
Bentham interpreted M hirsuta as an earlier synonym of his own M dispersa, and this would be acceptable provided that specimens of Sello's collection that were distributed as M hirsuta are indeed conspecific with those seen by Sprengel.
However Sello's collections are a mixed lot: at G, for example, are two unarmed plants, one with pinnae all bijugate and leaflets strigulose on both faces, one with 2-3-jugate pinnae and leaflets glabrous above.
The protologue ofM hirsuta is inconclusive, but disagrees with the material seen by Bentham in having only one pair of pinnae per leaf.
Mimosa dispersa Bentham is here assimilated into a variable and widespread M hirsutissima Martius, of which the known range lies well to the north of Uruguay.
I think it probable that the real M hirsuta K. Sprengel is one of the several extratropical mimosas first collected by SeUo, and may possibly but by no means certainly be M. schleidenii Herter.
Mimosa hirta Vellozo, Fl. flumin. icon.
11: t. 31.
1825.—Holotypus, the cited figure!—The corresponding text (Netto, Arch.
Mus. Nac. Rio de Janeiro 5: 437.
1881) gives the habitat as "in campis apricis mediterraneis transalpinis.
Bentham (1876: 319) surmised that the crude drawing o f M hirta represents a form o f M nervosa Bongard ex Bentham (=M. hirsutissima of this work), but I am unable to accept this interpretation.
The cited text calls for a leaf-formula of ii/8, and yellow 5-androus y7ow^r5 giving rise to 2-seeded pods with median constriction.
The flower-color suggests Neptunia, but the pod is incompatible.
In absence of specimens, the name is best set aside as unassignable to any particular species.
Mimosa irascens Martius in Martius & Schrank, Hort. reg. monac. 199.
1829, nom. nud. Mimosa isthmensis Standley ex LI.
Williams, Lilloa 4: 171.
1939, nom. nud. Mimosa macrocalyx var. pectinata Burkart in Reitz, Fl.
Uustr. catarin.
LEGU/I: 224 + mapa.
1979.—"[Brazil] Santa Catarina: Campos Novos .
.
.
950 m .
.
.
P. R. Reitz 6.407."-Holotypus, SI, not seen.
This appears from the protologue to be a wellmarked entity, differing from typical M macrocalyx in basally spurred setae and relatively long setular indumentum of stems, leaf-rachises, and margin of leaffets.
Known only from the typelocality in central Sta. Catarina.
Mimosa melanocarpa fma paucijuga Hoehne, Revista Mus. PauUsta 10: 672.
1918.-"N° 885 Lofgren, Araraquara, S. Paulo, 14/IX/88."
- Typus not seen, to be sought at SP.
This is said to differ from M melanocarpa melanocarpa in fewer pinnae.
Mimosa meticulosa Martius, Rora 21(1, Beibl.
II, 4-5: 55 [=Herb. fl. bras. 155].
1838.-".. . in prov. Minarum campis.
.
. ."—No typus found either at BR or M, and the protologue too generalized for certain recognition.
Mimosa meticulosa is unidentifiable through the description.
The problem of its identity and former interpretations of the name are discussed under M dolens (q.v.,
p. 582).
Mimosa meticulosa var. petiolaris fma polyphylla Chodat & Hassler, Bull. Herb. Boissier II, 4: 549 (=P1. hassler.
405).
1904.-"[Paraguay] pr. Chololo, Dec. [Hassler] n. 6585; .
.
. in valley fluminis Y-aca, Febr., n. 7095."
— Syntypi not noted at G or elsewhere, probably overlooked.
Presumably this is one of the many minor variants of M dolens found on the campos of Paraguay.
Mimosa mexicana (Hemsley & Rose) M. E. Jones, Preprmtedfrom Contr. W. Bot. 18: 39.
1933.- Based on and = Climacorrhachis mexicana Hemsley & Rose, as established by Morton, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 29(2): 101.
1945.
Mimosa millefoliata Scheele, Linnaea 17: 337.
1843.—"In provincia Minarum Generalium leg. Hartleben.
1832."—Holotypus, presumably +B; no isotypus found.
Bentham (1875: 407) adopted this name for his Schrankia macrostachya, of which the epithet was preoccupied in Mimosa.
The very short and in most respects inconclusive description does not support this interpretation, for Scheele specified a gland at base of the petioles.
The only mimosa known to occur in Minas Gerais or neighboring states of Brazil in which a petiolar nectary coincides with spicate flowers is M pithecolobioides, a species wholly dissimilar to M. millefoliata in foliage.
It seems likely that M. millefoliata is based on a specimen of Piptadenia (sensu lato), but its identity, unless an isotype can be found, is indeterminable.
Mimosa pseudo-echinus Teran & Berlandier in Berlandier, Mem. comis. llmites 11.
1832. = Prosopis juliflora (Swartz) DeCandolle, fide I. M. Johnston, Contr. Gray Herb. II, 70: 90.
1924.
Mimosa pudica ^ glabrata DeCandolle, Prodr. 2: 426.
1825.-"In ins.
Sancti-Domingi et Sancti-Thomasii.
Plum[ier] ed. Bur[mann] t. 202."
This ambiguous name is discussed under M pudica var. unijuga (q.v.).
Mimosa rhomboidea Martius in Martius & Schrank, Hort. reg. monac. 199.
1829, nom. nud. Mimosa rigida fma puberula Chodat & Hassler, BuU.
Herb. Boissier II, 4: 551.
1904.-"[Paraguay] in campo Ipe hu Sierra de Maracayu, Oct. [Hassler] 5169."
By oversight or mischance I failed to find, or perhaps to note, the type of this forma in the Geneva herbarium and I have found no duplicate.
It is described as different from M rigida in leaffets thinly puberulent beneath and is most probably a minor variant of M dolens var. foliolosa or var. anisitsii.
Mimosa semispinosa Liimaeus, Sp. pi. 522.
1753, based on M aculeis ad summitatem internodiorum confertis .
.
.
Linnaeus, Hort. cliff.
208 (Mimosa # 6).
1737 [1738].-No typus found.
Described from an immature plant in Cliffbrt's garden, grown from seed of American origin.
If a true mimosa, the armature and leaf-formula would fit M oligacantha.
Mimosa semispinosa K. Sprengel, Syst. veg. 2: 206.
1825.-"Nov.
Granat."
-No typus known to survive.
This might be supposed to be merely a reference to M semispinosa Linnaeus (see above), but Sprengel did not cite Linnaeus as the author.
Bentham (1875: 414) considered it an independent proposition and quoted specimens from the Balbis herbarium collected at Santa Marta, presumably by Bertero.
The single aculeus situated immediately below the node identifies this with some security as M oligacantha DeCandolle.
If Sprengel's name is indeed independent, it is a posterior homonym of no nomenclatural consequence.
The link to the wholly indeterminable M. semispinosa Linnaeus is tenuous at best.
Mimosa semitriptera Martius in Martius & Schrank, Hort. reg. monac. 199.
1828, nom. nud. Mimosa striata (Bentham) Spegazzini, Anales Mus. Nac. Buenos Aires 7: 281.
1902, based on Prosopis striata Bentham, London J. Bot. 5: 83.
1846.
This is another synonym of Prosopidastrum globosum, which see under M globosa, above.
Mimosa subuligera Martius in Martius & Schrank, Hort. reg. monac. 199.
1828, nom. nud. Mimosa tenuifolia Rojas, "Cat. hist. nat. Corrientes 61.
1897" ex Heslop-Harrison, Ind. kew. suppl. 15.
1974.
An unknown quantity.
Mimosa tessmannii Harms, Notizbl.
Bot. Gart.
Berlin-Dahlem 9: 967.
1926.
This has been equated (Bameby, Brittonia 38: 229.
1986) with Piptadenia uaupensis Bentham.
Mimosa unijuga (Hemsley & Rose) M. E. Jones, Preprinted from Contr. W. Bot. 18: 39.
1933.- Based on and = Climacorrhachis unijuga Hemsley & Rose, as established by Morton, Contr. U.S. Natl.
Herb. 29(2): 101.
1945.
Mimosa vernicosa var. ciliata Bentham in Martius, ¥1. bras. 15(2): 386.
1876.-"Habitat in Serra do S. Jose do Tocantins: Pohl."
—Typus said by Bentham to be at W, but not found there in 1984; a specimen at M, Pohl s.n. lacking locality data, is however annotated by Bentham.
I was unable to identify with assurance the specimen at M, but noted that it had a pod about 45 X 16 mm, with broad replum and valves coarsely strigose with appressed setae.
It is almost certainly a form ofM foliolosa sensu lato, and very Ukely might provide the earliest epithet for one of the varieties described in this work.
The type-locality is on the sources of rio Tocantins near 14°S in south-central Goias.
Mimosa violacea Bonpland ex Tenore, "Index sem. hort. neapolit. anno 1842, p. 12," reproduced by Walpers, Repert. bot. syst.
2: 905.
1843.
In 1845 redescribed by Tenore in Cat. Orto bot. Napoli, p. 87, and said to have been sent from Buenos Aires by Aime Bonpland. — No typus seen.
This has the leaf-formula of subser. Sensitivae and may well be an early synonym of M nuda var. glaberrima.
Mimosa virginalis Arruda in Koster, "Trav.
BrazU p. 500" 1816, not seen; [French ed. =] Voy. partie septentr.
BresU 2: 508.
1818.
Unknown to me, but the vernacular name Barbatimam given by Arruda suggests a species of Stryphnodendron.
Mimosa warmingii Bentham, Trans. Linn. Soc. London 30: 413.
1875 & /« Martius, Fl. bras. 15(2): 356.
1876.-"Habitat ad Lagoa Santa provinciae Minas Geraes: Warming."
—Holotypus, Warming 1017.
C!; isotypus, P! This is a species of Piptadenia (sensu lato), currently under study at Kew by G. P. Lewis.
Mimosa wilsonii Standley, Contr. Amold Arbor.
5: 73.
1933.—"Panama: Barro Colorado Island .
.
.
March 12, 1931, C. L. Wilson 130 "-Holotypus, F 6362051 This is Enterolobium schomburgkii Bentham.
Mimosa yaguaronensis Larranaga, Escritos D. A. Larranaga 1: 76.
1922.
Inst.
Hist. Geograf. del Uruguay.—Identified by Burkart, Darwiniana 8(1): 226.
1948 as Calliandra tweediei Bentham.
Appendix II. Mimosae of Sesse & Mocino A deficiency in the synonymy, and perhaps in a few instances in the nomenclature, of New World Mimosa is my failure to identify most of the binomials based on collections of Sesse and Mociiio, published posthumously in Plantae Novae Hispaniae (La Naturaleza II, 1: 175-179) in 1890 and Flora Mexicana ed. 2 (La Naturaleza II, 2: 255-258) in 1891.
These works were written long before Bentham's reorganization of tribe Mimoseae, at a period when Mimosa was nearly coextensive with the tribe itself.
A fair proportion of the names listed by Sesse are not new, but quoted from Linnaeus or other early botanists and, whether mere misidentifications or not, are no further considered herein.
Included, however, is one name based by G. Don on a Sesse specimen in the Lambert herbarium.
A few Sesse names published by DeCandolle, and based on figures made by artists of the Real Expedicion which are now in the Tomer collection of the Hunt Library (Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh), have been identified and appear in the appropriate place in the main text.
The toponymy of the Real Expedici6n is demonstrated by McVaugh in Contr. Univ. Michigan Herb. 11(3): 97-195.
1977.
Mimosa arborea Sesse & Mocino, 1891: 257.
Under this name are given phrase-names or diagnoses of what appear to be several different Mimosaceae, one of them Jamaican, none identifiable.
Mimosa asperata Sesse & Mocino, 1891: 256.— ".
.
. in Oppido S. Laurentii juxta Cordovam [Veracruz]."
This appears to be M asperata Linnaeus, although the Linnaean authority is not given.
The spine (or spicule) arising erect from between each pair of pinnae is distinctive of ser. Habbasia, to which M asperata belongs.
The specimen at MA Sesse & Mocino 2019 = F. Neg. 44255) labeUed M asperata represents M tenuiflora (Willd.) Poir. (det.
Rudd, 1964).
Mimosa esculenta Sesse & Mocino, 1890: 178, 1891: 257.—".
.
. in temperatis Novae Hispaniae locis."
A tree fifty feet tall, with elaborate leaf-formula, a large concave nectary at base of leafstalk, white flowers in globose capitula, and edihle pods.
Equated by McVaugh, 1987: 183, with Leucaena esculenta (DeCandolle) Bentham.
Mimosa foetidaSesseScMocino, 1890:177,1891: 257.—".
.
. cum praecedente [i.e., prope Apatzingan, Michoacan]."
A tree twenty feet tall, intensely malodorous, with leaf-formula iii/1 and a nectary on leafstalks.
Presumably = Goldmania foetida (Jacquin) Standley, known in modem times from Apatzingan.
Mimosa hirsuta Sesse & Mociiio ex G. Don, Gen. Hist. 2: 383, 1832.-Native of Mexico."
- Holotypus, formerly in hb. Lambert.,
not found.
This is not the same as M hirsuta Sesse & Mociiio (1890, immediately following), which had five pairs of pinnae per leaf, not one.
The description is compatible with some form ofM pudica, the name a posterior homonym of M hirsuta K. Sprengel (1825).
A specimen at MA (Sesse & Mocifio 3771 = F. Neg. 46364) labelled M hirsuta represents M pudica L. var. hispida Brenan.
Mimosa hirsuta Sesse & Mociiio, 1890: 178.— ".
.
. in calidioribus Novae Hispaniae."
Unarmed shrub 8 feet tall, with leaf-formula v/indefinite, theflowerswith many red, basally monadelphous stamens.
Probably a Calliandra.
Mimosa huarinchi Sesse & Mociiio, 1890: 177, 1891: 256.—".
.
. prope Apatzingan [Michoacan]."
Tree with leaf-formula i/4 and a nectary on leaf-stalks, a syndrome incompatible with Mexican Mimosa.
Mimosa michoacanensis Sesse & Mocino, 1890: 177.—".. . in oppido Sancti Johannis de los Platanos, prope Apatzingan [Michoacan]."
An unarmed shrub 12 feet tall, said to resemble M. [i.e., Albizia] lebbek, with leaf-formula iii/1 and globose heads of white polyandrousyZow^r^, the pods flat and membranaceous.
Scarcely Mimosa.
Mimosa microphylla Sesse & Mociiio, 1891: 255.—".. . in omnibus Novae Hispaniae calidis regionibus."
A shrub two feet tall, lacking petiolar nectaries, the leaf-formula viii/indefinite, the ^hite flowers in paniculate capitula, polyandrous.
The description answers to some form of Acacia angustissima Miller.
Mimosanivea^esseSLyiociho, 1890:179.—".
.
. in Chilpanzingi viciniis [Guerrero]."
An unarmed shrub nine feet tall, with leafformula x/indefinite and globose capitula ofwhite, apetalous flowers with many basally monadelphous stamens.
Not recognized, but no Mimosa.
Mimosa octophylla Sesse & Mocino, 1890: 178.— ".
.
. in Mazatlami montibus [Guerrero]."
An unarmed shrub eight feet tall with leafformula i/4 and polyandrous flowers with monadelphous filaments.
The description suggests Calliandra.
Mimosa parota Sesse & Mocifio, 1890: 111.— "... in caUdissimis Novae Hispaniae Provinciis."
A tall leafy tree, readily recognized (Standley, 1922: 391; McVaugh, 1987: 176) through description of the pod and through the vernacular name parota as Enterolobium cyclocarpum (Jacquin) Grisebach.
Mimosa procumbens Sesse & Mocifio, 1891: 256.—".. .in Praedio P. P. Carmelitarum Astillero dicto, prope Guadalaxara [Jalisco]."
A procumbent subshrub with leaf-formula vi/ 15, a cupular gland between one of the pairs of pinnae, and capitula of white polyandrous yZowers.
The syndrome of leaf-nectary and polyandrous flowers is foreign to Mimosa.
The specimen at MA (Sesse & Mocifio 3791 = F. Neg. 44268) labelled M procumbens represents Desmanthus virgatus var. depressus (Humb. & Bonpl.) B. L. Tumer.
Mimosa purpurea Sesse & Mocifio, 1891:255.— "... in Praedio de la Punta [perhaps near Cordoba, Veracruz]."
An unarmed tree twelve feet tall, without leafnectaries, the leaf-formula iv(-v)/20-25, the inflorescence capitulate, theflowerspurplish-white and polyandrous, the seeds very long and purple.
Not recognized, but not Mimosa.
Mimosa reticulata Sesse & Mocifio, 1891:256.— "... in montibus XomUo [=Jorullo, Michoacan]."
Briefly characterized by leaf-formula of i/9 and leaf-stalk terminating in a prickle and a gland.
Unidentifiable.
Mimosa rotundata Sesse & Mocifio, 1890: 178, equated with m/z^wzY/of Hernandez.—".
.
. in calidis Novae Hispaniae regionibus."
An unarmed tree attaining twenty feet in height, with leaf-formula if25, dense spikes of flowers villous within, and recurved moniliform edible pods of sweet savor.
Readily recognized as Prosopis (mesquite), and referred by Standley (1922: 351) to P. juliflora (Swartz) DeCandolle, by McVaugh (1987: 241) to P. laevigata (Willdenow) M. C. Johnston.
Mimosa sarmentosa Sesse & Mocifio, 1890: 178: 1891: 257.—".
.
. prope rivulos per Tapalcatepeci et Coahuayanae montes in anfractibus fluentes [Michoacaii]."
Sarmentose shrub armed with solitary prickles, the leaf-stalks with nectaries at base of petiole and between pinnae, the white flowers in dense nodding spikes, the pod oblong plane membranaceous.
The syndrome of leaf-nectaries and spicate flowers excludes this from Mexican Mimosa.
Mimosa septentrionalis Sesse & Mocino, 1891: 256.—".. . in montibus Amatitlani [Jalisco]."
A shrub ten feet tall, armed with solitary stipular prickles, the leaf-formula iv/8, and globose capitula of white y/ower^ with ten pink stamens.
The protologue is inconclusive: nothing in it excludes Mimosa, but no particular species is indicated.
Mimosa tenuifolia Sesse & Mocifio, 1891:258.- " .
.
. in Ayacapixtla [=Yecapixtla, Morelos]."
Ovate concave prickles, elaborate microphyllidious leaves, a petiolar nectary, and yellow flowers in spikes collectively identify this as one of the ant-acacias, not a mimosa.
Mimosa tomentosa Sesse & Mocifio, 1891:256.— ".
.
. in calidioribus Nov. Hisp. regionibus, ut Oppido S. Laurentii juxta Cordovam [Veracmz]."
A shrub with stems and leaf-axes all retro-aculeate, a leaf-formula of vi-viii/10-15, rusty-tomentose leaflets, and decandrous flowers in a pseudoraceme of capitula.
Nothing in the protologue excludes this from genus Mimosa, but the species eludes me.
The name is a posterior homonym, therefore of no consequence to the nomenclature.
Mimosa trunca Sesse & Mocifio, 1890: 178.— " .
.
. in Mazatlami montibus [Guerrero]."
A tree of moderate stature with leaf-formula i/1.5 and globose capitula of white pentandrous flowers, the filaments basally monadelphous.
The leaf-formula and number of stamens are compatible with Mimosa goldmanii B. L. Robinson, for which the name would be the oldest, if indeed a synonym.
No specimens found at MA in 1989.
Mimosa uncinata Sesse & Mocifio, 1890: 178.— " .
.
. in montibus Xochitepeci [Morelos]."
A three-foot shrub armed with recurved stipular spines (or aculei), the leaf-formula x/4-5, the pods plane and membranaceous.
Unidentified, but scarcely Mimosa.
